Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.



                    THE LITTLE HAZEL SERIES


                              THE

                         ROYAL BANNER;

                              OR

                       GOLD AND RUBIES.

                    A Story for the Young.


                      By the Author of
           "LITTLE HAZEL, THE KING'S MESSENGER,"
                          &c. &c.


                "Stand up! Stand up for Jesus
                   Ye soldiers of the cross,
                 Lift high his royal banner,
                   It must not suffer loss."



                           London:
              T. NELSON AND SONS, PATERNOSTER ROW.
                    EDINBURGH; AND NEW YORK.

                            1888.



                          Contents.

Chap.

    I. THE WISHING-WELL

   II. THE OLD NURSE

  III. THE DIADEM OF LEAVES

   IV. NEW FRIENDS

    V. AN ENGLISH HOME

   VI. SCHOOL LIFE

  VII. THE BANNER-BEARER IN TROUBLE

 VIII. CLIMBING SCHIEHALLION

   IX. TWO ANGELS

    X. A HIGHLAND FIELD-PREACHING

   XI. HOME LIFE

  XII. SOUGHT AND FOUND

 XIII. THE COUSINS

  XIV. A FAMILY GATHERING

   XV. THE BRIDAL DAY



                          THE ROYAL BANNER.

CHAPTER I.

THE WISHING-WELL.

   The well was deep, and the water,
     From some mysterious spring,
   Was ever gushing far below
     With a tender murmuring,
   And deep under ground a tiny rill
     Stole on in the dark to sing.

"HOW lovely it is! Only see, Aunt Charlotte! It is mine, you say? Oh, I
wish I were old enough to wear it! The rubies are beautiful; how they
sparkle!"

The speaker herself was a pretty sight—a blue-eyed, brown-haired little
maiden of about twelve years old, dressed in a bright-coloured print
frock, with a jacket to match, finished off at the neck and round the
loose sleeves with a pretty crimped frill. She was standing at the
moment we write of, at a window in an old-fashioned country mansion in
the Highlands of Scotland, carefully poising on her fingers a beautiful
diadem, composed of gold and rubies, which latter glistened brightly as
the rays of the autumn sun played on them.

The lady she addressed as aunt was engaged in writing, and hardly
seemed to notice the child's words; but a bright-looking boy, perhaps a
year older than his sister—for such she was—looked up admiringly at the
costly ornament.

"Well, it is a beauty, Nora, the gold 'specially. I wish I had it, I
know—the gold, I mean, not the diadem." And he laughed as he added,
"Fancy me wearing a diadem! But it suits you to perfection."

"Children," said their aunt, who had put aside the letter she had been
writing and come towards the couple, "take care what you are about. Put
the diadem back into its casket carefully, and then give it to me to
lock up in the old escritoire. So you both like it?"

Two voices answered in one breath, "Oh, so much aunt!"

"Nora admires the rubies, but I like the gold," said Eric. "But are not
they both beautiful?"

The lady thus appealed to looked down for a moment, thoughtfully, at
the rich casket in which Nora had enclosed her treasure.

"Yes," she said; "but when your own dear mamma died, and left the
diadem to me for her little daughter, she said she hoped both she and
her boys would find out that there was something 'better than gold and
above rubies.'"

"Better than gold!" repeated Eric. "Well, I think gold is pretty good;
one can do such lots of things with it."

But his words met with no response. Nora's head was bent, and a
tear had risen to her eye; for, though dimly, she still retained a
remembrance of the mother who had loved her so fondly.

"Above rubies!" And they were so beautiful; yet her mother hoped she
would find out something more beautiful than they. "Can there be
anything more so, aunt?" she said.

Her aunt smiled. "Yes, darling, much more so, much more valuable; and
you can obtain it, my child."

"I! O aunt—"

But just then the door opened, and a pleasant-faced gentleman entered.

"Eric! Nora! Indoors still on such a lovely day? Fie for shame! Put
away work and playthings, and off into the glorious sunshine. Look
yonder; the trees are glistening to-day as with many-coloured gems.
And, mamma," he said, turning to the lady the children termed aunt, "as
I passed the nursery door, I heard two little voices asking, 'Where's
mamma?' You had better go and see what's wanted. But where's Ronald?
Not at his book, I hope, when to-day is a holiday? He studies too much,
and you, Master Eric, too little."

"O uncle," said Nora, "Ronald is out-of-doors—I saw him go: but, for
all that, he had a book under his arm; he can't live without books,"
she said with a smile. "And this is his last day here for a long
time. Let us go, Eric, and find out where he is—at the Wishing-Well,
I believe. Oh, it will be lovely there to-day!" And so saying she ran
off, followed by her brother.

"What a sweet-looking girl Nora grows," said her uncle, addressing
his wife. "She daily reminds me more and more of her dear mother when
she was the same age, and I only some five years her senior. We two
were always great companions, although there was a brother between
us—Charlie, you know, who died some years ago in Canada. Ah well! I am
glad my own loving-hearted wife yielded to my desire to bring up dear
Elenora's children when they were left orphans. The charge has not
proved too much for you, Charlotte?"

"Oh no," was the ready response; "the three orphans have brought joy,
not sorrow, into our home, I think, Ralph; and our own little ones love
them dearly. Nora is a sweet girl; but Ronald has the most character of
them all. How I shall miss the noble boy when he leaves us! Eric can
hardly fill his place to me yet: he is very heedless; he is the only
one who causes me a moment's anxiety. He has not the generous nature of
the other two, I fear. Still, he is young, and I may prove wrong in my
judgment of him. We need much wisdom, Ralph, from God, rightly to train
these children and our own."

"Indeed we do; but, you know, we have the command, If any lack wisdom,
let him ask of God.'"

Just then the door opened, and a messenger from the nursery called Mrs.
Macleod away.

It was, indeed, a happy home in which the three orphan children of whom
we are mostly to write had, shortly after their parents' death, found
a warm welcome. Benvourd House, the residence of their dead mother's
brother, had also been the home of her own young days; and very
grateful did she feel when on her death-bed, her favourite brother,
with his young wife's full consent, undertook to bring up the little
homeless children, whose father had died in India only one year before.

Seven years had elapsed since then, and the children were growing up
quickly in their quiet Highland home, in which three little cousins had
been born since the death of Elenora Macintosh.

Ronald, the eldest of the three orphans, was now fifteen years old—a
clever, thoughtful lad, only prevented from being too much of a
book-worm by his love of outdoor sports, which had rendered him bold
and manly. And amid the mountain breezes, he had grown-up a strong,
hardy lad, with as gentle and loving a heart for the poor and weak ones
of earth as his own mother had possessed.

Nora was right. At the time our story begins, Ronald was seated beside
the Wishing-Well, book in hand. But the boy was not reading just then;
his heart was somewhat full. On the morrow he was to leave his quiet
home to go to a large school in England; and from thence, at the age of
seventeen, a cousin, who was the head of a mercantile house in London,
had offered to give him a situation in it. He hardly liked the idea. He
had a soldier's spirit, and would have chosen his father's profession
(who met his early death bravely fighting in an Indian war).

But Ronald had others to think of. He must work for his little
sister, whom his mother had left to him as his special charge, and
Eric as well. He was thinking of these things as he sat beside the
Wishing-Well, and he heaved a sigh as he laid down the spirited account
of the early Crusades which he had been reading.

"Ah, well!" he said. "The days of the Crusades are gone. I can no
longer join the noble band who sought to free the grave of our Lord
from the hands of the Infidel, nor boldly bear the banner of the Cross
and fight under it. I wish I could."

Was the boy thinking of the old legend of the Wishing-Well? At all
events, his amazement was great when a voice spoke:

"Have, then, thy wish. In the name of the King of kings, I invite you
to join in the noblest crusade that has ever been made—to rescue the
thousands of prisoners held captive in vile bondage by the Prince of
Darkness. Will you join?"

The lad rose quickly, a flush on his cheek. He had forgotten that he
had spoken his thoughts aloud; and certainly imagined he was alone in
this solitary spot, forgetting that an open pathway to the village
below ran through the copsewood close behind the well. Turning, he
faced the speaker—a young man of tall figure, and a countenance full of
intelligence and fire.

"Who are you?" said the boy. "And what do you wish me to do?"

In a powerful yet musical voice the answer came: "I am an ambassador of
the Most High God, seeking in his name to get recruits for his service
to join the crusade I have spoken of, which is led by the Captain of
Salvation, the Lord Jesus. Again, I say, will you, while the dew of
your youth is upon you, join the band?"

"How can I?"

"First may I ask, have you taken the Lord as your Master, and given him
your heart?"

The lad bent his head, then raised it calmly. "I have," he answered.
"By my mother's death-bed, seven years ago, I gave myself to Jesus."

"The Lord be praised!" answered the stranger. "Then, when the Captain
calls, you are bound to fight his battles, and display his banner
fearlessly."

"But, sir, how can I? To-morrow I leave this for school."

"The very place to begin," was the earnest reply. "Help the weak ones
there, like a true Knight of the Cross, and try to set some bond ones
free. Carry the Lord's banner there, and see to it you are a true
standard-bearer. Now, farewell! My time here is short. In the world's
great field of battle we may meet again; if not, let our trysting-place
be before the throne on high." Then, saying the words, "Inasmuch as ye
do it to the least of these my brethren, ye do it unto me," he strode
off through the heather as silently as he came.

For a moment or two Ronald gazed after him; then sank down once more in
the moss and ferns beside the Wishing-Well. When he again raised his
head, the stranger was out of sight.

Had it all been a dream? No; every word, every look, of the mysterious
speaker was too deeply impressed on his mind and eyes for that. One
thing was certain: he had promised anew to live to God and for God. He
had joined the great army of the Lord of hosts; and bending his head a
moment in prayer, he asked strength from above to "endure hardship as a
good soldier of Jesus Christ."

Just then a loud shout rang on the air.

"Here he is, Eric! I told you we'd find him here;" and with a bound
Nora stood beside the Wishing-Well. "Reading again, I declare, Ronald!"
said the merry little maiden, catching up her brother's book and
tossing it up in the air; taking care, however, to catch it ere it
reached the ground. "Do come, and let us have a race."

But ere Ronald could answer, the child's mood had changed again. "No,
wait a moment. I forgot, Ronald, this is your last day, and I want a
long talk with you; you know it will be an age ere we have a nice one
again."

And with the gentle look stealing over her face which so often reminded
her brother of their mother, she sat gently down and let Ronald twine
his arm round her waist.

For a moment there was silence; Nora was gazing thoughtfully down into
the waters of the well. Then she spoke: "Ronald, what is it that is
above rubies?"

"Rubies!" he said. "Little sister, what makes you think of them?"

A shadow crossed her face. "Eric and I have been looking at mamma's
diadem; and oh, it is so beautiful! I only wish I were old enough to
wear it, the rubies sparkle so. But aunt says mamma's wish for me was
that I might obtain that which is above rubies, and I thought I would
ask you what that is."

Ronald drew his sister very close to his side. "Yes, I know what it is,
Nora. It is the wise king who says, 'A virtuous woman is above rubies.'"

"Virtuous!" repeated Nora. "Oh, I know! That means 'good.' I'll try to
be that, and begin at once."

Ronald's reply to her remark was cut short by Eric, who had run off
after his favourite dog Cherry, and now returned, dashing down his cap
in his impetuous way; then, telling Cherry to lie down, he exclaimed,
"Come, Aldy—" (his great name for his brother), "as this is your last
day here for ever so long, let us all wish for some special thing
beside the well. Never mind whether the old legend is true or not. Who
knows? Let us try."

"I have wished already, Eric."

"And so have I," said Nora.

"Well, then," replied Eric, "tell out your wishes."

"Ah no, Eric!" said his brother. "Wishes are sacred. I won't tell mine."

"Nor I," put in Nora.

Truth to tell, she had wished she might wear the lovely diadem when she
grew up, and was not sure whether her brother would not laugh at her
wish.

"What stuff!" said Eric. "What's the use of wishing, if no one knows.
I'm not ashamed of mine one bit; so here goes: 'I do wish to get very
rich, have lots of money, heaps of gold.' Wait a bit, and see if my
wish is not fulfilled."

"Heaps of gold, Eric?" And Ronald laid his hand kindly on his brother's
shoulder. "Our mother used to say she hoped we would all find out what
is better than gold."

Eric made no reply; the mention of his dead mother had touched his
heart.

Only Nora spoke. "Ronald," she said, "I've unwished my first wish, and
wished another. Can I?"

Her brother smiled. "I don't know whether it will stand good, pet, or
not; I am not in the secret of the well."

"But, at all events, Ronald, my last is my real one. I'm sure the first
was just a sort of one; but I'll keep to this one, and see if it comes
true."

She had wished that she might obtain what is "above rubies."



CHAPTER II.

THE OLD NURSE.

   "Not yours, but His by right;
      His peculiar treasure now—
    Fair and precious in his sight,
      Purchased jewel for this brow.
    He will keep what thus he sought,
    Safely guard the dearly bought;
    Cherish that which he did choose;
    Always love, and never lose."

ON leaving the well, the children stood for a minute or two looking
around them, Ronald especially taking in every feature of the lovely
scene before him. And although the other two hardly then realized it
would be so, yet in after-years, in far different scenes, the memory
of that day, and even many minute details of the landscape around the
Wishing-Well, rose distinctly before their minds.

Amid the purple heather the well lay; clear and cool, soft green
moss grew close round it; and ferns hung over its sides in graceful
beauty—some tiny ones were still green there, whilst all around had
caught the autumn colours. From the well northwards, the eye ranged
over grand mountains—some clad with trees far up their sides, others
purple and brown with heather; whilst in the immediate background the
copsewood was glowing in crimson and golden glory, the leaves gently
falling with every light gust of wind, and strewing the ground as with
gold and rubies.

Eric soon wearied, and ran off to amuse himself with his pet rabbits;
but Nora and Ronald chatted on a while, till the nurse and two little
cousins came in search of Miss Nora, who was wanted indoors to see a
lady who was calling. Then Ronald set off alone to pay a farewell visit
far down the glen to an invalid widow who had been his mother's nurse.

After a short walk, he reached one of the most beautiful of Highland
passes, on the opposite side of which the cottage for which he was bent
was situated. Lovely indeed did the pass look that autumn day. Through
it dashed a noisy little river, white here and there with foam gathered
as it rolled over the high boulder stones that were deeply embedded in
its channel, and which at times almost obstructed its way; while its
banks on both sides were richly wooded—and as the boy's eyes rested on
them, they literally blazed in scarlet and golden splendour. No wonder
that his heart beat with enthusiasm as he gazed at the scene; and he
began, with boyish fervour, to repeat the lines,—

   "Breathes there the man with soul so dead,
    Who never to himself hath said,
    This is my own, my native land?"

And we marvel not that his heart shrank from the thought of leaving it
all for other scenes.

He received a warm greeting, chiefly in the Gaelic language, as he
entered the hut where old Peggy sat in her arm-chair.

"Come in, my young master, an' bide a wee, an' gledden the auld woman's
een wi' a sicht o' her bairn—" for such she always termed the handsome
lad.

He seated himself beside her as in olden days; but her keen eyes
noticed the tear that now and then moistened for a second the eyes of
her favourite, and told of a full heart. Quickly she guessed the cause.

"An' so ye're leavin' us, Maister Ronald, an' gaun yer first voyage
intil the wide world? Aweel, aweel! It's little auld Peggy kens aboot
that world, she that's been quietly fostered a' her days, as maiden,
wife, an' widow, in the Highland glen. But, O laddie!"

And she laid her hand kindly on his shoulder, "The Lord God, the Maker
o' a' the world, kens ilka turn in it; he's no ane to leave the lad
he's brocht to trust in him to lose his road in a strange land. Ye're
no gaun withoot a guid Guide, bairn; and Ane wha never leaves his wark
unfinished. 'This God is our God for ever and ever; he will be our
guide even unto death.' Ay," she added, "an' thro' the valley also;
an' he'll no gie up the wark even on the ither side; he's guidin' your
dear mother yonder, Maister Ronald, by the crystal sea an' the livin'
fountains o' water. Ye're no feard he'll fail you, my lad?"

"No, nursie," was the quick reply; "I've no fear of God failing to
keep his word; but oh, I fear for myself. You'll pray I may never be
'ashamed to own my Lord,' nor ever hide his banner. I've enlisted into
his army, nursie, and by his grace, and with his help, have promised
to be a faithful soldier and a true knight, to help the weak, and, if
possible, set free the oppressed."

The boy's eyes shone as he spoke; the old woman looked at him with
emotion.

"The Lord be praised for his work begun in your heart, my bairn; an'
may he keep you faithful thro' all temptations, an' at last gie you
the golden crown to cast at your Saviour's feet. Your mother left her
orphan children to the Lord's care, an' he's no ane to prove faithless
to such a charge, even tho' for a while they stray in their blind
ignorance afar from him."

She was silent for a minute, then said, "You'll mind Johnnie, my
Johnnie, Maister Ronald; my dead daughter's only bairn? Aweel, his
mother gi'ed him too into the Lord's hands, and yet—" and here a tear
fell on the old cheek—"he wearied o' his quiet hame amid our grand old
hills, and left his grannie in her auld age, and wandered off wi' an
idle companion into the wide world. And it's three years sin' I heard
frae him; an' yet tho' my heart wearies sair to see him, I can trust
him to the Lord and believe. He can and will draw him to himself yet,
even tho' my een should be closed to earth afore then. Ay, the Lord is
a promise-keeping God. The world is wide, Maister Ronald, I ken that;
but should you ever fall in wi' Johnnie Robertson, ye'll mind him o'
his auld Grannie Cameron, and the Highland glen where he spent his
young days? He had a kind heart, the bit laddie that I loved like my
ain son; and had he ta'en heed to the command o' the wise king, 'My
son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not,' he'd been here still
earnin' his livin', as his faither did afore him, as an honest tiller
o' the ground."

Ronald felt for the old widow. Well did he remember the handsome lad,
some four years his senior, who had been induced about three years
before by an idle cousin to leave his home and try his fortune in
London. Only once had he written to the grandmother he had seemed
really to love, and since then no word had come from him, and none knew
whether he was living or dead; but from the lowly hut in the lovely
Highland pass the widow's prayers of faith and trust ever rose for the
orphan boy she had reared so fondly.

Ere parting Ronald knelt down and asked the old woman's blessing. She
gave it to him in the name of the Father of the fatherless, and once
more charged him not to forget his old friend Johnnie.

The lad promised, though he smiled to himself as he thought of the
small chance he had of meeting the youth, although his school was in
the suburbs of the great metropolis.

Back again through the pass he walked, with his firm, elastic step,
drawing in with delight every breath of the free mountain air. Before
re-entering the house, he turned aside by a path which led down to
the old churchyard, and stood for a moment by his mother's grave. The
sunbeams were shining there, glistening on the autumn flowers, which
the loving hands of her children had planted. The boy plucked one to be
taken to his new home, and as he did so a prayer rose to his lips that
the remembrance of his mother, and her loving words and firm trust in
God, might never pass from his mind, but nerve him for the battle of
life which lay before him.

At the door of the house he was met by his brother and sister and his
two little cousins, Minnie and Charlie, and the rest of the afternoon
was spent in boyish frolics with them.

On the morrow came the parting. Nora's tears fell fast as the dog-cart
bore her brother, accompanied by Mr. Macleod, out of sight. But in her
ears rang Ronald's parting words:

"Good-bye, Nora; don't forget brother Ronald; and remember our mother's
wish concerning you and the rubies."

She had answered through her tears, "Yes, brother, I will; I have begun
already. I am going to be the kind of woman that is above rubies."

Poor Nora! She meant what she said, but as yet she had not even guessed
the true meaning of the words, and all her efforts were made in her
own strength, the utter weakness of which she had yet to learn in the
school of experience.



CHAPTER III.

THE DIADEM OF LEAVES.

   To the crags all bright, in the golden light,
     With floral diadems!
   As fresh and fair, as rich and rare,
     As any royal gems.

"PATIENCE is a virtue, and perseverance is a virtue, and so is
punctuality, and uncle says I possess none of these qualities, and yet
I want to be a virtuous woman; so I must try hard to become patient,
persevering, and punctual."

So soliloquized little Nora Macintosh the morning after Ronald's
departure for school. Just as she had formed these brave resolutions,
the prayer-bell rang, and knowing that her habit of coming into the
library five minutes late, and so disturbing every one, was one of
the causes of her uncle's complaint of her unpunctuality, she at once
opened her bed-room door, and for a wonder contrived to join the
family group ere they were seated. She was so pleased with this good
beginning of carrying out her resolutions that it was some time ere she
remembered, with a feeling of dismay, that she had forgotten her quiet
morning prayer in her own room.

When she remembered it, she ran upstairs and knelt down, then repeated
a form of words without thought, to which we dare not give the name of
prayer. It was a bad beginning. Still Nora was now quite content, and
confident that she would soon be all her mother had desired.

"Aunt," she said after breakfast was over, "it is such a fine day,
mayn't I walk across the moor half-way and meet Miss Stewart? And then
we'll come home together."

"Certainly, dear, if you are sure that is the way Miss Stewart will
come; only, remember you don't keep her waiting, as you did one day
last week."

"Oh no, aunt, I shan't do that; I am never going to keep her waiting
again, you'll see;" and so saying she bounded off.

Down the lawn and through the copsewood she tripped, enjoying the crisp
morning air, then out upon the moor, the heather of which was turning
brown, though patches of purple still lingered here and there.

Miss Stewart, who came for some hours each day to instruct her, was the
eldest daughter of a minister who lived at some distance from Benvourd,
and in general her shortest way lay across the moor.

Nora, after running through the heather for a minute or two, and
startling a covey of grouse, who rose with a whir as she approached,
stood still, and, shading her eyes with her hand, looked in the
direction Miss Stewart should have come; but there was no appearance of
her. She lingered a short time, then turned homewards, wondering if her
governess could have taken another road. She seldom did, still once or
twice she had done so.

Musing thus, she re-entered the copsewood, and stood admiring the
gorgeous colours of the low trees. Suddenly a thought struck her—it
would be such fun to gather a lot of the bright gold and scarlet
leaves, and form them into a diadem at home with ribbon-wire, some of
which she had in her work-basket. She knew she could do it, and then
she would have a diadem to wear which would look just like gold and
rubies. Wouldn't Eric like to see it! Absorbed in the idea, she set to
work, and forgot all about Miss Stewart, and the virtue of punctuality.
Alas! poor Nora, she was suddenly brought to herself by her uncle's
voice—

"Nora, what are you about? Miss Stewart has been waiting for you for
half an hour; you really must try to be more punctual—you will get into
a habit of being late for everything."

She rose hastily, scattering, as she did so, all her gathered hoard of
bright-coloured leaves on the ground. She had not a word to say for
herself, and was really grieved at having displeased her kind uncle.
She entered the school-room cast down and out of sorts, and quite
disposed to feel that it was no use to try to attain the virtue of
punctuality.

It was certainly Miss Stewart who required the grace of patience that
day, for her little pupil tried her sorely. Lessons repeated with
inaccuracy, music played without the least attention, and work done so
badly that it had to be taken out and done over again, made up the sum
of the morning's occupations; not that the child meant to give trouble,
but her thoughts were wandering, now to the beautiful diadem, now to
the leaves, then again to Ronald, and from him to her wish at the well,
and her morning's resolutions. She became impatient at returned lessons
and picked-out work, and gave way to temper more than Miss Stewart ever
recollected to have seen her do; and to sum up all, she had to spend
the afternoon indoors in disgrace.

It was very humbling, and Nora shed many tears about it—just when she
meant to be so very good. How had it all come about? Was there no
little voice whispering to her? It was because she was trying to fight
a very strong enemy in her own strength. Had she altogether forgotten
that it is only through Jesus we can overcome any sin?

If so, she was not long in having a reminder, for after a while a
gentle tap came to the school-room door, and her little four-year-old
cousin, Minnie (her special pet and plaything) entered. Tears shone in
the bright blue eyes.

"No cry, Cousin 'Nona;' Minnie so sorry 'cause you cry. Why do 'ou? Has
'ou been naughty, Cousin 'Nona'?"

The girl stooped to take the child on her lap, saying as she did so,
"Yes, Minnie, I am afraid 'Nona' is not good to-day. She can't be,
somehow."

The blue eyes were raised in amazement. "But, 'Nona,' Jesus can make
'ou good. Mamma says so. Did 'ou ask him?"

Ere her cousin could answer, the child was called away; but her words
lingered, and although Nora did not bend the knee, I think she did ask
Jesus to help her; but, like the boy and the runaway knock, she never
looked for nor expected an answer. Still her mother's desire and her
talks with Ronald were not forgotten, though she made small progress in
the heavenward path.

Mrs. Macleod watched her at this time anxiously, and half hoped that
she had begun the pilgrimage to the Celestial City, of which she loved
so much to read in Bunyan's wonderful allegory; but again she would be
disheartened, not at childish failures, but when for days at a time,
the girl would seem to give up all battling against her besetting sins,
all seeking to walk in the right path.

In all womanly matters Nora received a good training in her Highland
home. From her childhood, her aunt showed her many household matters,
and instructed her in them; and a very useful little maiden she proved
in many ways. It was she who had the knitting and darning of Eric's
stockings, the sewing on of buttons to his shirts. She also hemmed both
his and her uncle's pocket-handkerchiefs, and was always eager to help
her aunt in any work to which she could put her hand.

Unknown to herself, she was learning many of the accomplishments for
which the wise king extols the virtuous woman: and in stretching out
her hands to the needy, Nora had to make no effort; never did a more
loving, tender heart beat in a human breast. No wonder she was loved
in the cottages of the poor. It was a sight, to see the bright little
child, as she tripped over the hills and through the heather with a
flagon full of soup to carry to some poor bedridden old woman.

She was very happy then; and somehow, after Ronald's departure, she
seemed to love those messages of mercy more than ever. A thousand
welcomes, spoken in the Gaelic tongue, greeted her as she entered the
cottages of the poor, and the very look of her large soft eyes cheered
their lonely hearts. Her uncle declared she had a God-given gift of
nursing: no hand could smooth a pillow so well as Nora's; no one could
be more skilful in cooling a burning forehead, and shading the light
from aching eyes, than she was; and no foot could tread more gently in
a sick-room than hers did; and no voice sounded more sweet than hers
as she read aloud a page to the suffering one from God's own Word. No
wonder those who knew her best hoped she had become a "ministering
child" from love to the One who came to earth not to be "ministered
unto, but to minister."

Only the sharp eyes of Widow Cameron read her aright. "Eh, but she's
a winsome lassie," she would say to herself; "and wi' as kind a heart
as her ain mither had, and weel inclined too. Maybe she's seekin' the
right road, but I fear me she hasna got in at the Wicket Gate yet; and
for as bonnily as she reads the Book o' Life, she hasna learned in
truth to say o' our blessed Lord, 'My God, and my Saviour.'"

These remarks were made to herself, one bright autumn day not long
after Ronald's departure, when Nora had hastily entered the cottage to
read a bit of Ronald's first letter to the old woman.

Her brown curls were tossed about with the wind, and her cheeks glowing
with the exercise of her walk, when she tripped, brimful of life and
spirits, into the cottage.

"Good news to-day, nursie!" she said, holding up the letter in
her hand. "See, all this from your own laddie, as you call him,
and a special bit for yourself, too. Auntie and uncle have a long
joint-letter; but this is to me, his baby sister, he writes. Only
fancy!" And the long curls were tossed indignantly back as she spoke.
"Baby, indeed! And I'll be thirteen in February."

"Is't possible, missie? Dear me, to think o' that. It looks just the
ither day sin' we heard o' your birth in the far-awa' land. But now,
read to me aboot Maister Ronald, my bonnie lad. How fares he among
strange folk?"

"Oh, very well! Here is what he says, after a bit just to myself, you
know,—"

   "'Tell old nursie I am quite happy here. Dr. Bowles and his wife are
very kind (though he is strict too). We have a beautiful play-ground.
She can fancy, and you too, the noise fifty boys make there together.
Wouldn't Eric enjoy our games? I know nurse will like to hear that I am
trying to hold up the banner, and not be ashamed of doing so. Say to
her she must pray for me, for I am only a weak school-boy, and do not
like to be laughed at; but I know how even an earthly soldier has to
endure hardness, and surely Christ's soldiers should not shrink from
any reviling they may be called on to endure for his sake. I do hope
I may never forget how he wore, for me, the crown of thorns, and how
he says to his followers who are faithful to him: "I will give thee a
crown of life."'"

"That crown will be better than one of gold and rubies, Nora, will it
not?"

The child's voice became silent, a light cloud crossing the fair face.

But the old woman spoke—"The good Lord keep the lad frae a' evil, an'
gie him grace to steadily fight under, an' hold up the gospel banner;
and one day grant he may wear the golden crown."

Then suddenly she laid her hand kindly on the girl's head, and smoothed
back the tangled hair, gently pushing back the straw hat. With a
mother's tenderness, she looked into the deep blue eyes, and noted the
large fair forehead, but she spoke not.

Nora glanced up amazed. "What is it, nursie?" she said.

"I was wonderin', my lambie, what kind o' crown is to sit on your
bonnie brow. Is it to be the crown o' a vain world's folly, or the
everlasting ane your mother prayed so earnestly might rest there? Ye
canna hae baith, I'm thinkin'. Missie, which is it to be?"

Then Nora raised her head undaunted. "Oh, don't be frightened, nurse; I
am going to be all mamma wished me to be. Indeed, indeed I am trying to
be that which is 'above rubies.'"

The old woman smiled, but shook her head. "Ay—ay, I'm glad to hear it,
missie; but mind you begin at the right end—'God be merciful to me a
sinner.' The virtuous woman Solomon alludes to, is the one who has the
fear of the Lord in her heart, and whose trust is in him, not in her
own power o' doin' right. And the same wise king says, my dear, 'The
Lord giveth grace unto the lowly.' Have you sought strength and help
frae the Lord Jesus aboot this matter, Miss Nora?"

The girl rose quickly. "Oh, yes," she said; "but I must be going now.
The children were to meet me half-way. Good-bye, nurse. Shall I send
your love to Ronald when I write?"

"Ay, do, please; and tell him old Peggy'll no forget to pray for her
bairn. Fare-ye-weel."

One friendly nod, and Nora was off, down the path through the pass,
with as bounding a step as the mountain roe. But through the sound of
the autumn wind, she seemed to hear the words:

"Have you sought strength and help from the Lord Jesus in this matter?"

It was almost the same question her little cousin had put to her,
expressed in her baby language; and, somehow, Nora felt she did not
care to look the question in the face and give it a true answer. So to
drown thought, she began to sing, and just then little Minnie ran to
meet her, and together they continued their walk.



CHAPTER IV.

NEW FRIENDS.

   Oh, world unknown! How charming is thy view,
   Thy pleasures many, and each pleasure new.
   Oh, world experienced! What of thee is told?
   How few thy pleasures, and these few how old!

"AN invitation, Nora," said her aunt, soon after the Christmas holidays
had come to a close, "and for you."

"For me, aunt! Oh, who is it from? And may I accept it?"

Her aunt smiled. "One question at a time, dear. The invitation is from
Mrs. Forbes, asking you and Eric to spend to-morrow at Craiglora, to
meet Clara Ross and her brother from Edinburgh, who, it seems, have
been spending the holidays with the Forbeses. I believe Clara is just
about a year or so older than you, and Alick nearly as old as Ronald.
You know, dear, they are related to you by your father's side."

"And may we go?" repeated the child.

Her aunt hesitated, but replied slowly—

"Yes, I suppose so, dear; that is, if your uncle can conveniently send
you to-morrow; you know Craiglora is nearly ten miles off."

But Nora's shout of delight drowned any more words.

"Oh, how delightful! A day at the Forbeses, and two new companions!
Eric, Eric! do you hear?"

"Yes," he said, bounding, as he spoke, to his aunts side; "it's
splendid. I only wonder what sort of a fellow Alick is. Come off, Nora;
let's run and tell Minnie."

The children ran off; and Mrs. Macleod stood a few moments lost in
thought. The children had mingled so little with companions, and now
she felt she would have liked to know a little more about those strange
cousins: for she felt that the becoming acquainted with them involved
more than Nora knew; for already it had been mooted by the Rosses that,
if the cousins liked each other, Nora should be asked to spend some
months in Edinburgh with Clara.

"O uncle, how lovely everything looks to-day!" said Nora, as she,
accompanied by Eric, sat in the dog-cart beside Mr. Macleod, on their
way to Craiglora.

And, indeed, it was a lovely scene which met their eyes as they drove
along; fields, woods, and mountains wearing a slight robe of pure white
snow, which sparkled under the rays of the winter sun.

"Why, uncle," said Eric, "a few more days of frost and we shall have
skating; shall we not? Only fancy how Ronald will envy us when he hears
of it."

"The frost will need to be much stronger than this, Eric, ere the loch
bears; so, remember, no venturing on the ice to-day on any account.—But
see, Nora, yonder is Craiglora in the distance. I will just drive you
to the door, then go on to Castle Bellmore, where I am to spend the
day, and call for you on my way home. I hope you youngsters will have a
pleasant visit."

As they approached the door, Nora became both excited and shy; she
had mixed so little with other girls, that pain was mingled with
her pleasure. She expected to see her cousin a child like herself,
only, perhaps, a little taller; so she, as well as her uncle, was
much annoyed when Mrs. Forbes met them at the door, accompanied by a
tall, over-dressed, languishing young lady, as Nora thought, whom she
introduced to them as Clara Ross. Nora shrank back abashed. Was this
the girl with whom she had come to play, as she had thought?

Mr. Macleod was the first to break the silence.

"Why, Miss Clara, how you have grown since I saw you last! My little
puss here will be altogether alarmed at your grown-up appearance."

Clara smiled. "Oh, we'll get on nicely, Mr. Macleod," she said in an
affected way; "though I hardly thought that Cousin Nora would be such a
little girl."

In the meantime, Eric and Alick had introduced themselves, and set off
to visit the stables.

Clara Ross was dressed in the height of the then prevailing fashion,
and the number of flounces on her dress struck Nora with surprise,
and, for the moment, made her ashamed of her own neat though plain
plaid frock. The girls soon became friends, Clara chatting away about
Edinburgh and all its attractions.

"Do you go to many parties?" she questioned Nora.

The child smiled.

"Parties, Clara? How could we? There are so few people live here,
and the distance from one house to another is too great for any but
grown-up people to go in the evening. Oh, no, we never go to what you
call parties. But we don't miss them a bit. We have plenty of fun at
home, and we play all sorts of games; and sometimes in the evening,
aunt plays and sings to us; and in summer, we have out-of-door games,
and picnics, and drives. Oh, I assure you, we are never dull, never."

Clara shrugged her shoulders. "Ah well, you see, you know no other
kind of life; but as for me, I would die, if I lived here. Why, Laura
and Jane, my elder sisters, say life here is not life at all, only
vegetation. The poor people can have no ideas, nothing to take them out
of themselves."

"Vegetation!" repeated Nora. "Why, Clara, I'm sure you don't know
what you are talking about. If you visited in the cottages, you would
see how clever and thoughtful the people are; fond of their country,
I grant you, as who would not be?" said the girl with the enthusiasm
of a young Highlander. "And fond of their Bibles, too. But they have
plenty of interests that carry their thoughts to other places and
other lands, as well as their own. I know aunt would tell you so.
Why, there's hardly a family in the village near us but some of them
are abroad, or, at all events, away in town—some in Perth, Glasgow,
Edinburgh, Aberdeen, London, and in America as well. Oh! Life here is
not vegetation, I assure you;" and Nora's shyness vanished as she stood
up for her people and her country.

"Indeed, Nora, you are right," said Mrs. Forbes, who, unknown to the
girls, had entered and heard their conversation. "It is only foolish
people who talk that way. Believe me, Clara, that life lived truly
in such a place as this, is as full, as noble, as great as that
lived elsewhere. Nay, I question if those who speak of such lives as
vegetation know anything at all of what real life is, or value it as
God's great gift. True, many of our people have not many books; but
the few they have are well read and thoroughly understood. And though
they know nothing of life as spent in towns, that does not prove that
their minds are narrow. The truly narrow minds, Clara, are those which
have no resources within themselves which can enable them to spend
time profitably and pleasantly, without the constant excitement of
society.—But there, now, we must not waste all the day in talking;
suppose you join the boys in their game of battledoor and shuttlecock
in the library?"

Clara tossed her head a little at the proposal, muttering something
about childish; but seeing Nora's delight at the idea, she yielded, and
soon the house resounded with the laughter of young voices, in which
Clara's was loudest. With none of her foolish companions to laugh at
her, the girl was good-natured and childlike; but long ere they parted,
Nora got a vivid account of town pleasures, parties, and dress, which
certainly gave her a great longing for a peep at them all; and when she
told Clara about her beautiful diadem, her companion's interest was
much excited.

"A diadem, Nora! How lovely! They are quite the fashion just now. You
must come to visit us soon, and learn town ways and manners; and then
in a few years, when you are come out, you will wear the diadem at
parties. How I wish I had one! Do you know, when I look at you I see
you have a head and brow just suited for a crown."

What had she said that brought a cloud across the girl's face? A very
momentary one, no doubt, for it soon passed. Yet long after, when Nora
was outwardly engaged at a game with her cousins and Eric, she seemed
to feel the touch of a hand on her head and brow, and to hear the old
nurse's voice as she said:

"I was wonderin', my lambie, what kind o' a crown is to sit on your
bonnie brow. Is it to be the crown o' a vain world's folly, or the
everlasting ane your mother prayed might rest there? Ye canna hae
baith, I'm thinkin', missie."

Why not? She was asking herself, when Eric spoke impatiently:—

"Nora, it is your turn now. What are you dreaming about? I declare you
just looked like Ronald in a dreamy fit just now."

Nora started. "All right; I forgot it was my turn."

And then the game went on.

The girls became great friends. Clara was much attracted by her bright
young cousin, and determined to ask her parents, on her return home,
to invite her to come and live with them for a while. There was much
that was amiable and lovable in Clara's nature; but the crust which a
worldly upbringing causes to grow over the heart and affections was
beginning to grow on hers. An ardent nature, which in her early days
sought eagerly for love, for love's own sweet sake, was now seeking
rather for admiration, with its deadening influences. No one had spoken
to her of that which is "better than gold, and above rubies."

The drive home in the evening light was a quiet one. Even Eric's
spirits were subdued by the day's frolic, and Nora was more than
usually thoughtful. Clara's words, unwilling as she was to allow
it, had done their work: the visions of a town life, and plenty of
companions and amusements, were strangely blended in her young mind
with thoughts of sparkling rubies and an unfading crown.

At last she broke the silence by the question—

"Uncle, do you and aunt never mean to go to Edinburgh for the winter,
even after Minnie and Charlie are old enough for school?"

Mr. Macintosh smiled. "'Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof,'
Nora," he said; "and an evil indeed it would seem to me, to be obliged
to live even a few months of each year in any town. But as yet we
need hardly think on the subject, so far as Minnie and Charlie are
concerned; and no doubt, if it be found advisable for us to go when
they are old enough, the way will be made plain, and duty must come
before pleasure. Would you like to live in Edinburgh, Nora?"

The child flushed up. "No," and "yes, uncle. I would be sorry, of
course, to leave Benvourd; but I do think it would be pleasant to live
in a town for a while."

"That it would," chimed in Eric. "Alick says they have splendid fun in
their house, and parties every week."

Their uncle gave a low whistle. "Ha, ha!" he said. "Is this the effect
of the day's pleasure?" Then he added more gravely—"Do you think,
children, that your cousins have a happier home than you have?"

Nora's impulsive throw of her arms round his neck at that speech
was rather embarrassing, as he was the driver. And her indignant
declaration of "No, no! They could not have a happier home than we
have!" All but started the horse with its vehemence.

Whilst Eric, too, said indignantly, "That wasn't what we meant; only—"

But what was to follow the "only" was not disclosed; for at that
moment, they stopped at the door of their home, and both children ran
off eagerly to rehearse to their aunt the story of the day.

That visit, as Mrs. Macleod had anticipated, resulted in an invitation
for both children to spend the winter in Edinburgh with their cousins
the Rosses, and have the advantage of schools there.

"I have been fearing this," said Mrs. Macleod, as she handed the letter
to her husband. "How shall we answer it? There are advantages, we must
own; and yet, without being uncharitable, we cannot shut our eyes to
the fact that the Rosses bring up their children only for this world,
and God is shut out from their house."

Mr. Macleod laid his hand gently on his wife's shoulder. "Mary," he
said, "the Lord can find his own way into homes from which he is
apparently shut out. We must not decide this matter hastily, nor
without asking counsel of him. If we could always keep those children
guarded from evil, gladly would I do so; but I question if already a
spirit of discontent has not arisen in the hearts of both of them, as
regards the quiet life we lead here. If we let them go, it may be God's
way of showing them in what real happiness consists. Remember, as their
father's nearest relations, the Rosses have a right to have them visit
them for a while. But we must take time to consider such a proposal."

Three days after that morning, the children were told of the
invitation, and of the arrangement that their uncle and aunt had made
regarding it.

Eric was to go first, starting almost immediately, and remaining till
the end of the school season. Then next year, when Nora was a little
older, she should go, God willing, for some months also.

Few words were spoken by either of the children as this announcement
was made; though, boylike, Eric was delighted to go, and Nora, for the
while disappointed that her turn would be so long deferred. Still,
we must own that her loving heart shrank from the thought of leaving
those she loved so dearly. There were tears in her eyes on the morning
that Eric set off from the home-nest, leaving her the only one of the
orphans remaining there; but she only threw herself into Mrs. Macleod's
arms, and said quietly—"Oh, I am so glad that I have you and uncle to
love me still!"

Many anxious thoughts followed Eric as he left his home. There was no
evidence that any thoughts of heavenly things were in his heart; and
yet, though his friends failed to realize it, the seed sown was not in
vain. The day-by-day power of a good example, the blessed influence of
a Christian home, are never wholly without effect; though it was no
hand in that happy home that was commissioned from on high to lead Eric
to seek what is better than gold.



CHAPTER V.

AN ENGLISH HOME.

   "I tremble when I think how much
    I love him; but I turn away
    From thinking of it, just to love him more,—
    Indeed, I fear too much."

"ONE, two, three, and over!" called a bright-faced little fellow of
some eight years, as he jumped again and again over a low iron fence
which separated the shrubbery at one part from the shady lawn of the
old English castle of which he was the youthful heir.

A pretty curly Skye-terrier puppy shared his sport, and jumped every
time his young master did so. Those two were plainly having "a good
time" (as the Americans say), judging by the sparkle in their eyes.
They were alone, apparently; and the stately old trees, and even the
gray, venerable castle itself, seemed to keep ward over the young
creatures in their play.

Not that they were the only young things about just then: for young
leaves were quivering on the branches of the old trees, and young
birds were chirping in the pretty little nests in the shrubs and
hedges; young flowers were peeping up through the tender grass, and the
very sweetest of violets and primroses were dotting the banks of the
sparkling river that intersected the lawn; and, more than all, young,
woolly, curly lambs were frolicking about, enjoying themselves as much
as the merry boy, the owner of them all, and his frisky companion.

The old trees had looked down for many years on groups of merry
children playing beneath them, children whose shouts echoed all around,
but who had long since passed away, their work in life done, and a new
generation had taken their place—to pass away, too, in their appointed
time. Yet still the old trees grew on.

But there was only one child playing there now. Brothers and sisters he
had none. A fatherless child, too, but a merry one withal. The large
brown eyes were almost always dancing with fun, save when they rested
on the face of his widowed mother. Then there came a look of tenderness
and a depth of love into them, which quieted the fun, it may be, but
increased the happiness of the young spirit: for what were all the
riches to which the boy was heir in comparison with the mother whom he
adored?

Bold, reckless, and even disobedient to others, one word from her, one
look of her soft gray eyes, brought him in his most rebellious humour a
penitent to her knee.

In the midst of his play, in the noontide glory of that spring day, a
voice called, "Sir James! Sir James! Come in; a gentleman wishes to see
you."

Unheeded fell the servant's voice.

"Come in, indeed!" said the child, addressing the dog beside him. "Go
indoors in such a glorious day as this! Not likely, Snap, is it, for
all the gentlemen in the world?"

Then, as the call was repeated, and the butler walked up to his young
master, the boy turned: "You can say I'm busy, Walter. If the gentleman
wishes me, let him come here. It's a shame to be indoors in such a day!"

"It is her ladyship's desire you should come, sir; she said to tell you
so," said the butler.

"Mamma wishes me? Oh, then, I must go! Here, Snap, come along! She
won't wish to keep us long indoors."

On a sofa in the castle drawing-room lay a gentle-looking lady, dressed
as a widow; a tall gentleman, not unlike herself, stood near her. They
were engrossed in conversation; the subject a painful one to the lady
apparently, for her eyes were full of tears, and her voice trembled as
she said—

"So soon, Edward? Must it really be? How can I bear it? And he is so
good—and well advanced too; might it not be deferred for another year?"

But the answer came in a firm, manly tone, yet gentle withal: "No,
Charlotte, it cannot be put off. James is now eight years old: and
though I grant he is obedient to you, still he is under no control to
any one else; and, as his uncle and guardian, I must advise, nay, urge
his being sent away from home, and allowed to mix with other boys.
Think of the property and the riches to which he is heir; and remember,
dear sister, what a responsibility will fall on him. With the control
of so many and so much, he doubly needs to learn to control himself. I
know what a trial it will be to both of you; but in the end, it will be
best. The school I have selected is a good one; the master kind, though
strict; and his wife a ladylike, motherly person. Be brave, Charlotte,
and let him go. You know—" and here he stooped over the sofa, and
kissed his sister's brow—"that the 'Father of the fatherless' will not
forsake your child."

She looked up—a true woman, with a mother's unselfish heart shining out
in her eyes through the tears: "So be it, then, Edward; he shall go,
and I will trust and pray."

Just then the door opened, and the beautiful boy bounded in.

"Oh, Uncle Edward, are you the gentleman who wished to see me, and
brought me away from such a game of fun with Snap?"

Then, shaking hands with him, he ran to his mother, and stood beside
her.

"But, mother dear, it was because Walter said you wished me, that I
have come. What is it, mother?"

The question was asked in a troubled tone, for his quick eye had
detected the tears that still glistened on the dark lashes.

"What is wrong, mother darling?" And, the boyish wildness all laid
aside, he bent, with a gentle look, over her.

"Uncle Edward and I have been talking about you," was the reply, as she
gently put back the brown curls off his large open forehead.

"Well, and what then? I've been doing no harm, mother—only jumping with
Snap. I could not have sat still to-day. Why, out-of-doors everything
seems dancing and jumping—the leaves on the trees, the little river
over the stones, and the lambs, mother—oh, if you only saw them! They
are just wild with fun. I do believe, if you had been out, you would
have run yourself, mother. I could not have stayed shut up in the
school-room to-day for even one hour. I met Mr. Dale coming, and told
him so, and that he need not go on, for I could not learn a lesson on
such a day."

"James," said his uncle, in a stern tone, "are you the proper person to
tell your tutor when you are to learn lessons and when not? It is high
time such a state of affairs should come to an end." Then, in a kinder
tone, he said, "Tell me, James, do you think you are put into this
world only to please yourself?"

The brown eyes fell for an instant; but the saucy look shone in them
again as he answered, "I suppose not, uncle; but I can't sit still when
the sun shines like this, and everything calls me to come out and play."

At these words Lady Dudley looked anxiously at her brother. How could
she tell this boy that ere long he must leave his happy country
home, and spend, not one, but many hours of each day pent up in a
school-room? But the expression in her brother's eyes left her no
alternative.

Drawing her son close to her, she said, "James, can you be a brave boy
for mother's sake, and help her to be brave too?"

He started up—"Ay, mother, that I can; how can I help you?"

Calmly then she told him all.

At first, he hardly took in all that her words implied.

"Go to school, mother? Leave you, and Winder Castle, and Snap? Oh,
mother, uncle, I could not! Don't send me away—oh, please don't! I'll
do anything, Uncle Edward—anything I'm bid. I'll send and ask Mr. Dale
to come back this very day; and I'll sit hard at lessons for hours, if
only I need not go away."

"James—" it was his uncle who spoke—"I thought at least you would try
to save your mother pain. Look there!"

For Lady Dudley, who was in delicate health, turned deadly pale, and
lay half fainting.

In a moment the boy was himself again, and, with a bottle of aromatic
vinegar in his hand, bent over his mother—making her smell it, using
all the while every endearing term he could think of; and when she
was restored, he said bravely, "Mother, dear mother, don't look like
that again, and I'll do whatever is best. I'll go, and show you, and
uncle too, that I'm not selfish. I will be brave for your sake; see if
I don't. Only, I may come back soon, mayn't I? And you'll not send me
far-off; say you'll not send me far!"

"No, my boy, my own darling boy, you will be only a few hours' distance
by train. And you will come often home to see us all; mother could not
live long without her boy. God bless and keep him!"

No more words passed on the subject, that day in Sir James's presence;
but more than one inmate of the castle noticed that the boy played no
more, but sat silently under the shade of the old trees, or else at his
mother's couch. Poor child! He could not remember his father's death,
so this was his first sorrow. But true to his promise, he kept bravely
up, and the tears which he shed were shed alone, where no eye but that
of his Father in heaven saw them. Not for worlds would he increase the
sorrow which he saw his mother was feeling at parting with him.

"By the way, Charlotte," her brother remarked, on the day of his
return from leaving his nephew at the much-dreaded school, "Dr. Bowles
mentioned to me that he would put James under the special care of one
of the steadiest boys in his school—Ronald Macintosh, an orphan lad
from Scotland. I wonder if he can be a son of the Elenora Macintosh
whose husband fell in the Afghan War, and of whom our brother Willie
used to speak as the sweetest Christian lady he ever met. I should not
wonder if it is the same; for now I remember Dr. Bowles said his uncle
had a property in the north called Benvourd, and I know Willie used to
speak of Elenora's home by a name something like that."

Lady Dudley's face brightened for the first time since she had parted
from her child. "Oh," she said, "if he be a son of Captain Macintosh,
of the 14th Indian Cavalry, he will be well brought up, for both father
and mother were Christians; though, to be sure, they have been dead
some time. O Edward, will they be kind to my boy, my little son? How
will he bear it? And how shall I?"

These last words were to herself. And then she went with her heavy
heart to the very best place she could go with it—even to the throne
of grace; there to seek again help for her loved child, and strength
for herself to bear up bravely for his sake. She did not fail to ask
for this child so richly gifted with the world's wealth, that he might
learn to use it aright, and to estimate it at its true value; and in
the spirit if not the very words of Elenora Macintosh's dying prayer,
she asked that her loved boy might have the true riches, even those
heavenly ones which are "better than gold."

If any parent thinks that her grief at parting from her boy for so
short a time is exaggerated, let such bear in mind all that he had been
to her from his birth, and that he was her "only son," and she was "a
widow."



CHAPTER VI.

SCHOOL LIFE.

   Unfurl the Christian standard!
     Lift it manfully on high!
   And rally where its shining folds
     Wave out against the sky!

SATURDAY afternoons were seasons of special delight at Knowlton
School, as at many another; for then the boys were free, under certain
regulations, to do as they liked, and almost entirely without the
supervision of the tutors—Dr. Bowles holding the opinion that boys put
on their honour, and really trusted, were less likely to break rules
than those who were watched too closely. So no boy was called on to
give an account of the manner in which the day was spent after one
o'clock, if they were only inside the gates at a specified hour.

One thing, however, was forbidden. Within a walking distance of
Knowlton there ran a bright, sparkling river, shaded in many places
by trees, which afforded a pleasant shelter in summer days. Whilst
the river itself in some parts was known to be well stocked with
trout—a temptation of no small kind to the boys. In former years Dr.
Bowles had obtained leave for some of his older scholars to fish in it
occasionally; but of late the permission to do so had been withdrawn,
and so the doctor found he had to make a stringent law on the matter,
and every boy knew that transgression of it would meet with summary and
severe punishment. Some of the boys still grumbled about it; but really
they had not much reason to do so, for what with cricket and games of
all sorts, pleasant strolls through the wood not very far distant, or
visits to the metropolis itself every now and then with Dr. or Mrs.
Bowles, they had plenty of pleasant ways of passing their Saturday
afternoons.

It is on a bright June Saturday that we again take a peep at Ronald
Macintosh. He is sitting with one of his old dreamy looks, half gazing
out of the window, half looking at the clouds as they skim along. He is
alone; and though his lips are silent, we take the privilege of putting
his thoughts into words:

"'Thou hast given a banner to them that fear Thee, that it may be
displayed,'" he was saying in his heart. "'Displayed,'—but surely that
does not mean we must tell everything we do? Now, I do want to go and
see that old sick woman I found out two or three weeks ago. She said my
reading to her comforted her. But then the boys have begun to wonder
where I go and what I do. Surely I am not ashamed to tell? Still, it is
no business of theirs; and if I did, it would look as if I wanted to
boast of doing it. It can't be wrong to be quiet about it. Of course,
when they know, there are several will laugh and call me names; and I
do not like that. Perhaps it is cowardice keeps me from telling—I don't
know. 'Thou bast given a banner to them that fear Thee, that it may be
displayed because of truth.' But this has nothing to do with truth; and
it is the Captain who has said, 'Let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand doeth.'"

Here came a pause, followed by the resolution: "No, I will not say a
word about it unless Dr. Bowles asks me, which is not a likely thing.
And I must try to go to-day, for when I missed a Saturday lately, poor
old Susan said she was wearying for my coming all that day; and I'll be
back in time enough for a game at cricket afterwards."

So saying, he rose and began to prepare to go out. Ronald had a good
name at the school, where he had now been for some months. He was a
favourite with the masters, who marked his diligence at lessons and
love of books; and was liked also by most of the boys from his obliging
disposition and his prowess at all sorts of outdoor sports. True, there
were some amongst them who sneered at what they called his religious
notions, fit only for priests or women; but even in that respect his
frank, truthful, consistent character, silenced in time those who
opposed him, and won from them the testimony that at least Macintosh's
goodness did not make him stuck up.

Very faithfully, notwithstanding, had Ronald held up the banner; and
several of the younger boys, especially little James Dudley, knew that
it was by his words and example that they were saved from the bullying
of some of the elder ones. Only two boys regarded Ronald with dislike;
and these were the very leaders of all mischief—Tom Pritchard and
George Dundas. It was they who invented the funny names for him, as
they termed them; such as "Peter the Hermit," "Praying Aldy," "John
Knox," and many others. At first the others had joined in the laugh
which these names elicited; but by degrees the larger number ceased to
see fun in tormenting a fellow, as they said, who was ever ready with a
kind word and action. If he liked to pray, where was the harm? It would
not be a bad plan if some more of them copied his example. And so, on
the whole, Ronald's days at school passed pleasantly.

Just as he was starting to go out, on the Saturday we are writing of,
Dr. Bowles accosted him: "Macintosh," he said, "Mrs. Bowles and I are
going to London, and if you would like to accompany us, you can come
also."

Ronald's first impulse was to say, "Thank you, sir; I should like so
much to go;" but as the words rose to his lips, the remembrance of the
old woman, and her disappointment at his non-appearance on the Saturday
he had missed, made him hesitate, and with an air of embarrassment,
he said, "Many thanks, sir; but I am afraid I can't go to town this
afternoon; I—" Here he hesitated.

Dr. Bowles looked at him wonderingly. "Why Ronald," he said, "it was
only the other day you expressed a wish to Mrs. Bowles to go again to
town. What has changed you? Some special game at cricket, I suppose.
Well, well, take your own choice; you know I never interfere with your
Saturday pleasures. But I must go now, or I'll be too late."

And without letting Ronald say another word, he was off. There was
a sore sense of disappointment in Ronald's heart as, some minutes
afterwards, he set off across the fields to Susan's cottage. He knew
he was doing right; but just then it cost him a struggle. Yet, had not
the Captain under whose banner he fought, said, "If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself"? And had he not vowed that, as far as
possible, he would try to help the weak and suffering ones of earth as
a true Knight of the Cross?

So with a more cheerful heart, he sped on his way, the pleasant summer
air and bright sky cheering him. He saw one or two of the boys as he
left the play-ground, and shouted to them that he would be back for a
game in an hour or two; but he did not stay to talk to them just then,
waving back even his own favourite little Sir James Dudley, pointing to
him that he was off for a walk.

Susan's cottage lay in the very opposite direction from the river, and
it was impossible for even a quick walker to go to both places and
return to the school within two hours; so Ronald made up his mind to go
straight to the cottage. On his way, he fancied he caught a glimpse of
two boys crossing the fields which led to the river, and wondered if
they could be any of the school-boys, but the distance was too great to
let him distinguish the figures.

He soon reached the cottage, which stood alone, and, to his no small
disappointment, found the door locked. As his knocking met with no
answer, he concluded that the old woman must be asleep, and her little
grandson, who took care of her, out. He lingered about for some
minutes, in hopes that the child might be playing near; but seeing no
traces of him, he very unwillingly retraced his steps. He went back
slower than he had come: he had given up a great pleasure, and yet had
been of no use to the old woman. It seemed hard. Still he felt he had
done right; and by the time he reached the field where his companions
were playing at cricket, he had entirely got over his disappointment.

"Come along, Macintosh," was the greeting he received. "We have been
waiting for you; come and help us."

And in a moment the boy was engrossed in his favourite sport.

Dr. Bowles did not return from London till late, and the boys only saw
him at evening worship.

Sunday passed in the usual way: the hours after church services,
or rather between them, had become doubly pleasant to Ronald since
Dudley's arrival, for somehow the little home-sick follow had found out
that Macintosh was often alone then, and never ill-natured if a little
boy disturbed him; so with fear at first the child had slipped away
from some of the rougher boys to try and keep a promise he had given
his mother to spend some portion of the Sunday as much in quiet as he
could. He had told Ronald this, and from that day the two contrived to
be together for a quiet hour, reading a little, talking a little, till,
despite the difference in their years, these two became great friends;
and in helping the little boy, Ronald rejoiced to feel he was doing the
Master's work.

On Monday, more than one of the boys remarked that the face of their
usually kind master wore a troubled, stern look. After breakfast, ere
lessons began, he spoke:

"I have a question to put, to which I desire a truthful answer. It has
come to my knowledge that one or more of the boys from this school, in
defiance of my most express commands, were seen at the river fishing
on Saturday; and now I request that the boy or boys who were guilty of
the act will stand up and say so, in order that the odium of it may at
least not fall on the wrong party."

A dead silence fell on all, but no response was made, no boy stood up.

Dr. Bowles looked sorely grieved. He threw a pained glance at each;
then he said, "I number amongst my so-called young gentlemen a coward
as well as a law-breaker."

Still no word was spoken.

Then the question was put to each, "Were you at the river on Saturday;
and if so, were you fishing in it?"

Each boy answered, "No;" some, it might be, less distinctly than
others, but all in the negative.

Dr. Bowles fairly groaned, but dismissed the boys without another word.

Presently, to his no small amazement, Ronald Macintosh was requested to
go to Dr. Bowles in his study. The look he met as he entered the room
was one to be remembered. Mingled with sternness, there was in it so
much of heart-felt grief.

"Ronald Macintosh," were the words which greeted him, "had I been
asked which of all the boys under my care I believed to be the most
truly Christian one, I would have said it was you. Deep, therefore, is
my grief when I find that, so far from that being the case, you have
proved yourself a breaker of the laws of the school, a coward, and,
much as I dislike to use the word, a liar!"

The lad's hot Highland blood was up in a moment, and, without thinking
to whom he spoke, he exclaimed passionately, proudly:

"Dr. Bowles, take back those words; no man living shall use them to me!
I am neither liar nor coward, and repeat, I was never near the river."

A dead silence followed, in which, through the fearful conflict in his
mind, conscience was already speaking. Ah! Ronald, it said, is this
having the meek and lowly spirit of a follower of Him who, when he was
reviled, reviled not again? True, you are falsely accused; but it was
certainly not your part to speak in that way to your master, whatever
he said to you.

The silence was broken by Dr. Bowles. "The evidence I have of your
guilt, sir, is an undeniable one; but at present I cannot enter either
on that subject or on the punishment awaiting you. Retire to your own
room, till you have at least gained the mastery over your temper, so
that I can speak further to you."

And without a word, but with a bursting heart, the boy went to his
room, bolted the door, and cried passionately.

What did it all mean? he asked himself. Why did suspicion rest on him?
And, above all, what was the evidence which Dr. Bowles had received,
and which he said was conclusive of his guilt? Guilty in this matter he
was not; but when the first burst of anger passed, very plainly did he
see how he had sinned: he had been guilty of disrespect to Dr. Bowles,
and had sinned against God by his outburst of passion. Ah! Was this the
way in which he was to hold up the banner of the Lord?

What, he asked himself, were some of the marks which the true soldiers
of Christ bore, by which all men could distinguish them as easily as
they could the Crusaders by their garb and outward mark? He knew them
well; only the day before had he been talking to little Dudley about
them—"love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness." All! How
he had failed; no wonder, he said, that he needed the cross which was
laid on him by the unjust suspicion, when God knew all the evil that
was in him.

Then, throwing himself on his knees, he told all to the One who by his
Spirit hath said:

   "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us."

Then he rose quieted, having sought that the Lord would stand by him
and give him strength to endure false accusation calmly, and yet clear
him from it in his own way and time. One duty lay plainly before him—he
must ask Dr. Bowles's forgiveness for the manner in which he had spoken
to him.



CHAPTER VII.

THE BANNER-BEARER IN TROUBLE.

   Shall Jesus bear the cross alone,
     And all the world go free?
   No! There's a cross for every one,
     And there's a cross for me.

ERE Ronald again entered the study, another boy had been there, one who
went of his own accord. A rumour had arisen in the school-room that
Ronald Macintosh was the boy accused of having been seen fishing in the
river, and of having denied the fact. True, the report was not believed
by all; but, at the first flash of it, Sir James Dudley had left the
school-room, and sought the much-dreaded study of the headmaster. He
entered the room, however, unabashed, his head erect, the brown eyes
sparkling with indignation.

"Dr. Bowles," he said, "I have come to tell you that you are wrong.
Ronald Macintosh never broke a rule of yours; and he never, no never,
told a lie. I don't know who did; but I do know he did not. Why, I
believe he'd sooner die than say what was not true. You don't know,
sir, how good and kind he is, nor all he has done for us little
fellows; and—and he loves God, sir, just as my own mother does, and has
been trying all he can to make me a true Christian boy also; and I will
say, sir, you are wrong in thinking it was him, even if you beat me for
saying so."

The brave little heart was giving way when the doctor spoke. "No,
Dudley, I will certainly never beat any boy for defending a friend in
whom he believes. It grieves me, as much as it does you, to think evil
of Ronald. It grieves me more, far more than a little boy like you can
understand, for I also thought highly of him; but this much I will tell
you, the proof of his guilt cannot be put aside: his fishing rod was
found, at least a part of it with his name on it, close by the spot
where Mr. Lawson's man saw the boy fishing, and found a trout left
behind when the fisher saw him coming and took flight. Had the evidence
not been so strong, I would have refused to believe it could have been
Ronald Macintosh."

The brown eyes fell, but only for one moment. Again they were raised
with a look full of confidence to the master's face.

"But, Dr. Bowles, I saw Ronald when he left the play-ground, and he had
no fishing rod in his hand; and he was only an hour away, and he could
not have had time to be down by the river and catch a trout there, and
be back so soon. No, sir, depend on it, Ronald is not the boy who broke
the rule of the school."

Dr. Bowles smiled. "Well, Dudley," he said, "he has at least a brave
defender in you, and rest assured I will sift the matter fully, ere the
sentence of punishment is pronounced. As to the fact of his having no
fishing rod in his hand when he left the school, that carries little
weight with it; for I believe he had an accomplice, who probably was
out of the bounds ere Ronald left, and who, no doubt, had the rod in
his possession. The man declares he saw two boys run away; although he
believes only one, and that the biggest of the two, was fishing. It's a
sad story altogether. Now go, Dudley, and leave me."

Just then the door opened, and Macintosh entered; and little Dudley, at
a sign from the master, left them alone. The anger had passed from the
lad's spirit, and he was calm now, as he asked Dr. Bowles to forgive
him for the hasty words he had spoken, and for any disrespect he had
shown to him. The pardon was granted, as far as that offence went; but
the tone in which it was accorded was cold and hard.

"And now, sir," said the master after a pause, "I repeat the accusation
already made, of the truth of which I believe I hold the evidence
beside me, that you broke the law of the school on Saturday last by
fishing in the river for trout, knowing that a severe penalty would be
inflicted on any boy so doing; and more, that after having done so, you
kept a cowardly silence, when the request was made that the boy or boys
(for it is believed you had an accomplice) should stand up and confess
the deed. And, still further, to the sin of disobedience you added the
greater one of falsehood, by solemnly denying the committal of the deed
when the question was separately put to you. Now, sir, what have you to
answer to these accusations?"

Ronald's face was crimson with indignation; but he controlled himself
to speak calmly.

"I have only one answer to give, and that, as in God's presence, I do
give. Dr. Bowles, I am not guilty of any one of the things you bring
against me, on what evidence I know not. I never was even near the
river on Saturday. I was only one hour out of the school bounds, and
then I went in a different direction. So, in the denying it, I was
neither a coward nor a liar."

The last word was uttered with difficulty. Dr. Bowles looked steadily
at the bold, fearless eyes that met his own. Could they, he was asking
himself, belong to one who was acting the part of a hypocrite? And
for the first time he was staggered in his belief. Still, what of the
fishing rod? Without a word, he produced it.

An unmistakable look of surprise and pain crossed the boy's face as he
said, "That is my fishing rod, sir. Did you take it from the shelf in
our room?"

"No, Ronald Macintosh," was the stern reply; "it was found by the
river-side, dropped by the boy who was fishing there. Your name is on
it; and, despite the pain it causes me to say it, I can have no more
conclusive evidence that you are the guilty one. Besides, I remember,
only too plainly, your refusal to go to London with Mrs. Bowles and me,
after you had expressed a strong wish to do so only the night before.
Even then your manner struck me as strange; now it is easily accounted
for. O Ronald, Ronald! I am sorely disappointed in you," and as he
spoke, he leant his head on his hands in sore distress of spirit.

The amount of apparent evidence against him fairly overcame Ronald, as
well as his master's grief; but he spoke out. "Dr. Bowles, listen to
me one moment, ere you condemn me thus. I see plainly what cause you
have to do so. I know not who is guilty in this matter, but I am not. I
never took that rod from the place I put it in when I first came here;
who took it, I cannot say. I am almost certain it was in its place when
I left the house. I did not accompany you to London, much as I wished
to do so, because I thought my duty was to remain here."

At these words the master raised his head. "Your duty?"

"Yes, sir."

"Where, then, did you go during the hour that you confess to being
absent from bounds?"

"Do you know a solitary cottage, sir, that stands on the part of Mr.
Lawson's grounds the farthest off from the village?"

Dr. Bowles nodded assent.

"Well, sir, I went there, intending to read God's Word to a poor woman
who is bedridden, to whom I have read before. I had heard she was
sorely disappointed at my having missed the previous Saturday, and that
was the reason of my refusal to accompany you. I see now I should have
told you all; but I feared you might think it was ostentatious of me to
do so."

Dr. Bowles's eyes brightened. "You have proof then, that the hour you
were out of the play-ground you spent in reading God's Word to a poor
woman?"

"I have no proof, sir, if my own word is to be doubted, for I found the
cottage door locked, and so had to return home. You know, sir, that
cottage is nearly half an hour's walk from here, and as I was back in
an hour I could not have had time to read to old Susan."

"Well, but did no one see you at the cottage? Because, if there be
evidence that you were seen there, it would be conclusive you were not
at the river, as from the points of distance you could not have been
both at the cottage and at the river."

"No, sir, I saw no one; though I looked in all directions for little
Tommy Fegan, Susan's grandson, who lives with her, I did not see him."

Dr. Bowles's brow darkened. It was strange, he said to himself, that no
evidence of the truth of the boy's assertions could be found, whilst
the overwhelming evidence of his guilt had been produced. There was but
one course open to him, and that was to wait a few days ere pronouncing
sentence on the boy and writing a full account of the transaction to
Mr. Macleod.

In the meantime, Ronald, except in school hours, was to be separated
from the other boys, and the master would make every effort to discover
the real truth of the matter. The belief in Ronald's guilt, which
had at first possessed him, was shaken; not only by little Dudley's
testimony, but by the lad's clear, steady eye, and the truthful
character he had hitherto borne. And not altogether in vain had
Ronald's steady uplifting of the royal banner proved.

In the school-room, with the exception of two or three, there was
but one opinion held on the subject, and that was, that Ronald was
innocent; but how the boy suffered during these days none knew, save
the God who allowed him to go through such a trial for the purifying
of his faith and the chastening of his proud spirit. Closely was he
watched by master and tutors during the week, but none could detect
any signs of guilt or fear: steadily he went through with his lessons;
fearlessly he bent his knee in private prayer, morning and evening.

Yet the day was drawing near when, if no evidence of his innocence
appeared, the disgraceful sentence of expulsion from the school would
be pronounced against him. During these days, Sir James Dudley spent
every spare moment out-of-doors prowling round the spot where the
fishing rod had been found, feeling in every place in hopes of finding
some trace of the guilty one, but in vain. Dr. Bowles had himself
visited the sick woman, and she had confirmed the truth of the boy's
story, of his reading to her from time to time; but of that Saturday
she could say nothing, except that she knew she had slept most of the
afternoon.

Never had the doctor felt more perplexed. If Ronald was innocent, who
then was the guilty one? Once more, he publicly appealed to the boys,
telling them that the sentence could be no longer put off—the next
day he must decide, and implored them, as in God's sight, not to let
punishment fall on the innocent.

As he spoke, a short, stifled sob was heard, which most of those who
noticed it thought came from Ronald's breast. But Dudley's sharp ears
had caught the sound, and knew the sob was not Ronald's: quietly he
noticed that it came from a little boy, George Dundas, and as he was
known to be the friend of Pritchard, the only boy in the school who
bore malice to Macintosh. Dudley knew that sob was from no grief at
Ronald's disgrace; and a hope sprung up in the noble boy's heart that
he had a clue to the real offender.

After lessons, he sought out Dundas, and, without asking him any
questions, spoke of Ronald, how good, and kind, and loving he was;
reminding Dundas how he had got him not long before out of a scrape;
and then concluded by saying that Ronald, like George himself, was an
orphan, with no father and mother to care for him.

"And, maybe," said the boy, "his uncle will be so angry, he will turn
him to the door, and poor Ronald will become a wanderer on the face of
the earth."

George listened in silence, not condescending to answer one word; but
some hours after, he sought the master's study. Once inside it, he
broke down, sobbing like a child.

"Dr. Bowles," he said, "I have come to say, I wish to go home—to leave
school—I can't be good here. I'm turning worse and worse every day;
and my mother, on her death-bed, made me promise that I'd try to be an
honourable, truthful boy, and I can't be that here. Please, sir, don't
ask me why; but write to my guardian, and ask that I may go home."

Poor George! He, too, like Ronald, was an orphan boy; but, unlike him,
he had never sought a strength beyond his own to hold him up; and since
coming to Dr. Bowles's, he had got so entirely under the influence
of Pritchard, that almost unconsciously he had entered on a downward
course.

Dr. Bowles was much amazed. "Why, George," he said, "what is wrong? Why
can you not be truthful and honourable here? It is my great desire to
render so all the boys under my care."

Then, as if a sudden thought had come into his mind, he said quickly,
"Has the story of the fishing anything to do with your distress?
George, do you know who is the real culprit?"

No words came; no reply to the question; only loud sobs, as if the
boy's heart was breaking.

But in a minute or so, the master caught the words which sent a thrill
of joy through him:

"I must not, will not tell. Only, sir, don't send away Macintosh;
indeed, indeed, he does not deserve to be punished. He is not guilty—he
knows nothing about it; but I must not tell who is. I will not be a
tell-tale."

Ere Dr. Bowles could reply, a knock came to the door; and little Dudley
entered, followed by a tall young man in the dress of a peasant. The
brown eyes danced with a look of joy and triumph, such as they had not
worn for many a day.

In a few words his story was told. Prowling about by the side of the
river, as he had so often done lately, that morning he had met the
young lad who was now with him, and who had asked him:

"Be you one o' the lads that live in the school yonder?"

He had answered, "Yes."

Then said his questioner, "Canst tell if the lad wi' the scar on his
face, that was fishing here last Saturday, caught any fish?"

At these words Dudley had sprung up, and eagerly asked for an
explanation.

"You see," said the young man, "I was comin' along that day to see a
friend on the other side o' the river, and was meanin' to cross at the
bridge farther down, when a good-looking lad wi' a mark on his face
comed up to me, and asked if I belonged to these parts."

"And when I said, 'No; I comed from a farm a good bit off,' he says,
'All right then; I may ask you: I'm going to fish hereabouts, and I've
got a new rod, but the tackle's got all wrong—would you lend me a hand
to put it to rights?'"

"So I says that I will; and we sorts it all, and I left him a-fishing.
And I guessed he was one o' the scholards in the big school; and so I
just wanted to know if he had caught many fish."

"So," said Dudley, addressing the master, "I brought him right off to
you, sir; for he says he can tell in a minute what boy he spoke to;
and, sir, you know there is only one in the school has a mark, and
that's Pritchard. And," said Dudley, unable to suppress his delight, "I
knew it wasn't Macintosh—it could not have been."

The matter was soon settled; the moment Pritchard saw the lad enter
the school-room, he broke down and confessed all. He was the guilty
one; but he had not intended, in taking the rod, to implicate Ronald.
He took it because it was the only one he could lay his hands on; and
fear and cowardice together made him silent when he found that the
transaction was discovered, and the guilty one called on to declare
himself.

When the truth was discovered, the feeling of the boys was without
exception one of gladness that Ronald was proved innocent. We need
not add that Pritchard was sent home; such an example could not be
tolerated. And from that day George Dundas spoke no more of leaving
the school. The lesson he had received was a salutary one for him. It
was he who was the second boy whom Mr. Lawson's man had seen running
off across the field. But though George knew that Pritchard was the
offender, he had taken no part in the transaction, and knew nothing of
Ronald's rod having been made use of. He only saw Pritchard fishing, as
he was strolling past from another field.

But taking in the story at a glance, when he saw the man coming down
the river from the other side, and Pritchard throw down the rod and
make for the school, George had run also, afraid of being caught and
suspected of trespassing. Fear of Pritchard had kept him silent when
Dr. Bowles had spoken.

And what of Ronald? He had suffered much during these days, and learned
some needful lessons; but calmly at last he had committed his way
unto the Lord; and now it was with a heart full of gratitude unto him
that he returned thanks that his character was cleared, and that the
royal banner he upheld had not, through his sin, been disgraced. His
influence in the school from that hour became stronger; and more than
one boy was led openly to take his stand on the Lord's side, fight
under his banner, and seek for that which is better than gold, and more
to be desired than rubies.



CHAPTER VIII.

CLIMBING SCHIEHALLION.

   "My God, I thank thee, who hast made
      The earth so bright;
    So full of splendour and of joy,
       Beauty and light:
    So many glorious things are here,
       Noble and right."

A HIGHLAND picnic on a bright August day, when the mountain-side where
it is to be held is purple with heather, and the only clouds visible in
the bright blue sky are soft, small, white fleecy ones, and young faces
are glowing with pleasure at the prospect before them—who that has ever
enjoyed such a recreation can ever forget it?

Holiday-time has once more come round, and Benvourd House rings with
the voices of the assembled youngsters. Ronald is there, bringing with
him from school not only a goodly number of prizes, but a letter from
Dr. Bowles of high commendation for the good influence he has exercised
over the other boys.

And Eric has also returned from his Edinburgh visit, which had lasted
some months. At times there is a more thoughtful expression on his
face than of yore, which Mrs. Macleod notes with satisfaction, though
the cause of it has not been disclosed: only the All-seeing One, who
directed the boy's course to the house where, to human eye, He was shut
out, knows the real cause of the grave though as yet unsatisfied look
that at times flits over the face of the heedless boy.

As in the court of Ahab, there dwelt a God-fearing Obadiah, and in the
corrupt palace of a Cesar, there were souls who loved and served the
Lord Jesus. So in the household of the Rosses, whose God seemed to be
the prince of this world, there lived a child whose heart the Lord had
opened—a little dark-eyed boy of Spanish origin, the orphan boy of a
dead sister of Mrs. Ross, who had married a young Spaniard, and in
her life-time had been cast off and disowned by her friends for the
misalliance, as they termed it.

But when both father and mother died, leaving their only child homeless
and penniless, Mr. Ross had insisted on taking the orphan and bringing
him up with their own children. And so, at the age of six years, little
Pedro became an inmate of their home. A child too thoughtful for his
years, shy, and sensitive, he never really amalgamated with the family:
kindly treated in one way, neglected in others, he lived in a world of
his own, and wove fanciful dreams, and created heroes and heroines for
himself; and even in the midst of his lessons, visions of the sunny
land of his birth and his childhood were ever before him.

No one understood him; and life was beginning to cloud around him, when
sickness came, not serious, but lingering. Into the house from which
He had been tried to be excluded, the Lord entered, and taking the
little orphan boy by the hand, led him apart, so to speak, and spoke
comfortably to him there; and from that bed of sickness, the child
rose no longer sad. A new love had come into his lonely heart—a new,
never-failing, never-changing Friend had become his; memories of almost
forgotten teaching had come back to him, and the Saviour his parents
had loved and served had whispered the "Peace, be still," to the weary
young heart.

Few noticed the change, unless it were Alick and Clara. "Pedro looks
happier now," they said, "and is far more obliging than he used to be."

And his tutor remarked, "Pedro begins to learn fast now, and no longer
dreams over his lessons. Take care, or he will outstrip you all."

But Pedro dreamed still, only not in lesson-time and made heroes of
those who took his fancy; and so it came to pass that when the little
Highland boy came amongst them, and spoke kind words to the child who
was an orphan like himself, Pedro exalted him into a hero, and almost
worshipped him. And when, after a short acquaintance, he saw that Eric
shrank with amazement from many of the ways of the house, and refused
to spend the Sundays in idleness or play—keeping the promise he had
given his uncle and aunt, that he would set aside some portion of the
Lord's day for Bible study—little Pedro's heart beat with joy as he
thought he had found one who had learned to love Jesus, and would help
him on in the heavenward path.

Eric saw this, and shrank from accepting a character to which he had
no claim: for earthly goods, not heavenly ones, were Eric's ambition;
the crown of the world's wealth, not the unfading, one of glory, was
the crown he longed to wear, though the influence of his Christian
upbringing still lingered in his heart, and made him grieved at living
in a house where God's blessing was not daily sought in family prayer
as at Benvourd, and God's day not reverenced and kept holy as it was
there.

All this he told Pedro; but the boy remained unshaken in his belief
that his new friend was a Christian, and often appealed to him on
matters of difficulty.

In vain Eric expostulated, till at last the question arose—Why should
he not seek to be what Pedro thought he was? And at times a real
desire, born of the Holy Spirit, arose in his heart that he too, like
Ronald and Pedro, might be a child of God; and through the haziness of
his desires there glimmered in the far distance a longing for something
better than gold.

Pedro's strong belief in him did good to the volatile boy, and enabled
him often to say "No" to his cousins when they desired to lead him into
temptation.

"They are all very kind," he wrote to his aunt some weeks after his
arrival, "but somehow life has a different aim, apparently, here from
what it has at Benvourd. The cousins think a great deal about dress,
and go to evening parties very often, or else have them in their own
house; but Alick and I get on famously. And I like school, tell uncle,
and we play no end of games; but for all that I often think of you all.
You, aunt, would like Pedro; he is a splendid little fellow, and as
good as can be; he sometimes reminds me of Ronald. He has taken such a
fancy to me, I can't think why; but for all that I am glad he has."

And now Eric was once again back at Benvourd full of glee, on the day
we write of, as the party, accompanied by Mr. Macleod, and Clara and
Alick Ross—who were again in the neighbourhood—set off at early morn
for a picnic on the side, if not on the summit of Schiehallion.

The long drive at last came to an end. Nora, who had never been there
before, was in raptures at the beauty of the scene; though, as they
drew near the mountain, they saw with anxiety that a mist had arisen
and was covering the mountain-top, wreathing it round as with many
folds.

"Here we are at last," said Ronald, as he sprang off the hardy Highland
pony on which he had ridden for miles alongside of the waggonette.
"See, Nora, yonder is the inn where we are to put up the ponies whilst
we climb the hill. Doesn't it look grand—Schiehallion I mean—towering
so high, though you can't see its head just now, as it has got its
night-cap on; but the wind will soon blow that off—don't be afraid."

But Mr. Macleod eyed with a suspicious look the rising mist and a bank
of dark clouds that was now distinctly visible on the horizon. "One
thing is certain, boys," he said, "we must have a guide, especially if
there is any idea of your trying to reach the top."

"Oh yes, uncle," said a number of voices in one breath; "we are bent on
going to the very top. Why, that is to be the great fun."

"Girls and all!" said Mr. Macleod. "What say you, Miss Stewart?"

That lady had kindly accompanied the party, chiefly to look after the
girls. She shook her head, saying, "I am afraid the girls will hardly
reach the top, but we'll try."

And so, amid much fun and laughter, the ascent began, Mr. Macleod
having succeeded in finding a shepherd well accustomed to act as a
guide. One thing only he insisted on—the picnic on the hill-side must
be abandoned, if they had any intentions of reaching the top. Some
slight refreshments they might carry with them; but the dinner must
take place after they had come down.

The view, even half-way up the hill; was charming—mountains, peak on
peak, rising around, giving them a foretaste of the more expansive view
to be seen from the summit.

Bravely they pressed on, especially the mountain-bred children, whose
limbs were well accustomed to the act of climbing, and whose feet loved
to press the springy heather. More and more solitary did the scene
become as they ascended, and left even the lonely Farm Inn far below.

God's impress seemed set on all around. Surely the majesty and power of
the Almighty Creator are wonderfully felt amid mountain scenery. All
the children felt it, though in greater or less degree: it was as if
they had come nearer God than ever before.

But it was Ronald who, as he walked between his uncle and the shepherd,
uttered almost involuntarily the words:

   "Great is the Lord, and of great power: his understanding is
infinite."

   "Praise the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the heights."

As he spoke, the shepherd reverently lifted his cap. "Ay," he said,
"it's on the heights we can best feel as if we can best praise the
Lord, young sir; yet down in the vales, he can hear our voices also,
and like sweet melody, our songs o' praise sound in the ear o' the
Almighty. But it's grand to walk the heights and to watch the clouds
as they gather on the mountain-tops. But 'deed, sirs, I likena' the
look o' the clouds noo. I much doubt our reaching the top. An' we must
take heed, for the mists gather quickly; an' well though I know the
way, still it's hard to find your whereabouts in the mist. I think the
leddies, at least, should go no further, but rest here while we go on a
bit further an' see what like it looks."

There was a loud demur at this from Nora and even Clara.

"O uncle!" and "O Mr. Macleod! Let us go on too; we will not be beat—we
must get to the top."

But just then rain began to fall. They had already got into the midst
of a cloud; and somewhat abashed, they stood still to consider.

The guide looked despondingly. "I fear, sirs, even if we could reach
the top, there would be no view, and my advice is that we should all
turn and go down, for the rain is going to be heavy."

But his voice was drowned by the three lads all exclaiming in one
breath: "No, no! Let's get on. Who minds a little rain? We're not salt
or sugar that will melt. Let the ladies stay here till we go up, and
we'll be back in no time. Do let us try."

"Well, sirs, if you're bent on it we can try; but I warn you, you'll
get nothing but a wetting for your trouble. However, I'll take you
round the shoulder of the hill, and look around; but if the mist be
thick there, I'll not go one step farther, for there's danger farther
up."

So with this decision they were obliged to be satisfied; and the guide,
putting the ladies, as he said, under the shelter of an overhanging
rock, and leaving them under the care of Mr. Macleod, set off with the
boys.

"Here we are, back again, uncle," said Eric, as he bounded down the
hill, about a quarter of an hour after they had set off with the
guide. "When we got round the shoulder of the hill we found ourselves
enveloped in mist, and Sandy wouldn't let us go a step farther. Isn't
it a shame?"

At this moment the guide, accompanied by Ronald and Alick, appeared,
and accosting Mr. Macleod, said, "'Deed, sir, we must get downhill as
fast as possible for the rain's getting worse, and these hill showers
are heavy, and wetting ones as well; so let's be off."

Amid much mirth, despite the disappointment and the rain, the party
hastened downwards; but ere they reached the inn they were thoroughly
soaked. Once inside, peat fires were blazing; and much laughter was
expended as the girls presently appeared in the little parlour where
the picnic dinner was to take place, attired in all manner of fantastic
dresses, kindly lent by the women of the house whilst their own wet
garments were drying.

Miss Stewart, attired in the hostess's Sunday dress, looked strange
indeed; while the girls, in woollen petticoats, coarse worsted
stockings, and bright-coloured short gowns, evoked shouts of laughter
from the boys, who, on their part, were running about without boots
or stockings. But, notwithstanding, the day's excursion was fully
enjoyed by the youngsters, and with great glee they rehearsed their
adventures in the evening to Mrs. Macleod; and in after-days it became
an established joke how a whole party had set off to go to the top of
Schiehallion, and were nearly lost in the mist.

More than once during those pleasant holidays did Ronald find his way
to the cottage in the glen, and many a pleasant talk he had with old
nurse, who still cherished the vague hope that somewhere in London
Ronald would meet with her lost laddie.

It was strange enough that never, during the six weeks they spent
together, did the three children meet at the Wishing-Well. Ronald sat
often there alone, as in olden days, and mentally reviewed the scene
with the passing stranger, renewing in God's presence the resolution he
had made, the vow he had taken, to serve under the royal banner.

But Nora specially avoided the place: truth to tell, she was afraid
just then to stop and think, afraid to take a glance into her own
heart, for Clara's influence was telling upon her, and she had made up
her mind to have a sip at the pleasures of life ere she really drank
at the well of living waters; and she thought more just then about the
gold and ruby crown of this world than of the one which endureth for
ever. Ronald's quick eye marked the change in his loved sister, and he
in part guessed the cause, but he deemed silence the best course then
to be pursued, though he did occasionally throw in a word of counsel.
But he saw that in her happy home she was all unconsciously learning
many of the qualities which characterize the woman who is "above
rubies." The wood was piled up on the altar of her heart and life, only
awaiting the fire from Heaven, which sooner or later, he was sure,
would fall.

To his brother, Eric spoke little of the new thoughts which had begun
to stir in his breast; but he did talk to him of Pedro, and of the
affection the little fellow had taken for him. And Ronald felt, without
having been told, that an influence, powerful in God's hand for good,
had begun to touch the life of his younger brother.

Once again the parting day came round; and this time the separation
would be of longer duration, for in six months Ronald was to leave
school and begin business in London with his cousin, and Eric was then
to take his place at Dr. Bowles' for a whole year, after which he was
to enter a mercantile house in Liverpool, from whence he would proceed
to China. And so amidst tears, the orphans parted once more—Eric
returning for a while to Edinburgh, whither by-and-by Nora, would
follow him; and when the last evening came, and Ronald raised the hymn—

   "Here we suffer grief and pain;
    Here we meet to part again;
    In heaven we part no more—"

Nora broke down and sobbed like a child. Nor was she much quieted when
in prayer her uncle asked: "That all the party then at the throne of
grace might one day, through the merits of Jesus, meet before the
throne on high, and obtain from his hand a crown of glory, better far
than gold and rubies."



CHAPTER IX.

TWO ANGELS.

   "Do not cheat thy heart, and tell her
       Grief will pass away;
    Hope for fairer times in future,
       And forget to-day.
    Tell her, if you will, that sorrow
       Need not come in vain;
    Tell her that the lesson taught her
       Far outweighs the pain."

"COME, Nora, make haste and finish dressing your hair; the guests will
be arriving before long, and I want so much to see how you look with
your lovely diadem on. Papa says you will be the beauty of the room
to-night. Do make haste, dear."

Clara Ross was the speaker of these words, as she and her cousin Nora
stood before a large mirror, engaged in dressing for an evening party
which was to take place at the Rosses' house in Edinburgh, whither Nora
had lately arrived to spend some weeks.

Three years and more have elapsed since we accompanied the cousins
on their picnic up Schiehallion, and Nora is a young lady now—a very
pretty one, we must confess. She stands now as when we first saw
her, poising the costly diadem in her hand, wearing, however, a more
thoughtful face than she did then. She is attired in a simple dress of
white, worked muslin, her dark-brown, wavy hair simply braided, but
caught up at the back of her beautifully-formed head by a comb, from
which it fell in a profuse quantity of natural curls down her neck. Her
face still has the same sweet, open expression of her childhood's days;
but there is a sad look in her blue eyes as they rest on the diadem.

In reply to her cousin's words she said, resolutely, "I am finished,
Clara, but I shall not wear the diadem to-night; I am too young for
such an ornament. Another year, perhaps, I may, but not yet. I tried it
on, and it felt strange. I could not wear it."

And as she spoke the girl raised her head, as if to efface the mark the
coronet had left on her hair. As she did so a slight shudder passed
over her, and words she had thought forgotten recurred to her memory.
Once more old nurse's voice seemed sounding in her ear:

"I'm wonderin', my lambie, what kind o' a crown is to sit on your
bonnie brow. Is it to be the crown o' a vain world's folly, or the
everlastin' one your mother prayed might rest there?"

Then, as if to stifle thought, she put the diadem once more into the
casket and shut it in with a sharp click.

"Well, Nora, you are a queer girl, and no mistake," said Clara. "Not
going to wear your beautiful diadem after all, and you know Walter
Lushington and Alick, and even little Pedro, have been longing to see
you with it on."

"No; for once you're wrong, Clara," said Nora, testily. "Walter and
Alick may have said so, but not Pedro: boy though he is, he would
rather one day see another crown on my head."

And as she spoke she took the casket and locked it in her drawer.

Clara gazed at her in amazement. "Well, perhaps you are right about
Pedro, but then he has such peculiar, old-fashioned notions. But what's
wrong with you to-night, Nora? you're not a bit like yourself. I don't
believe you'll enjoy the party at all in that mood; and really, you
know, it's your first quite grown-up ball, and you don't look a bit
glad about it."

"Well, Clara, to tell the truth, I don't feel glad. I wonder if it
is the right sort of life for me, or—" and her lip quivered as she
spoke—"if mamma would have cared for me entering on it; aunt does not,
and Ronald does not, and—" But the sentence was left unfinished, for
Clara broke in indignantly—

"Papa and mamma think it is the right sort of life for my sisters
and me, so why not for you? Though you are different from us, too; I
suppose it is your bringing up that has made the difference."

And Clara was right; the blessed influence of her Christian upbringing
had told on Nora, and although this was now the third winter she had
spent in the Rosses' house, she remained quite different from them:
she had developed into a truly beautiful character. Not in vain had
the example of her aunt and uncle's daily life proved; not in vain
had the seed of good been planted in her heart. From everything mean
and unwomanly Nora shrank; with all her cheerfulness, there was never
levity in thought or word; from senseless frivolity her heart recoiled;
and many noticed that the light joke or malicious remark ceased when
Nora drew near. The charm of true, noble womanhood was around her;
and even her young admirers checked the idle compliment or flattering
words, with which they were wont to greet other girls, when they spoke
to her.

Yet her winning manners attracted all who saw her, and her influence
was always exercised for good: she was still the gentle, helpful hand
in a sick-room she had been in her childish days; her voice had become
even sweeter in reading and singing than of yore; and in all household
matters she was an expert, as even Mrs. Ross testified. But the one
thing needful was wanting still: man had done his part—the Christian
training had been given, the wood was piled on the altar; only, the
fire from Heaven, the breath of the Holy Spirit, was still awanting to
set it aglow.

The girls were dressed at last, and ready to go downstairs; yet Nora
still lingered, she scarcely knew why. Was it that in her heart she
shrank from the knowledge that this evening was a sort of crisis
in her life? Hitherto she had been regarded only in the light of a
school-girl; now, when her seventeenth birthday was fairly passed, she
was acknowledged in that character no longer; and Mr. Ross had openly
declared that the ball that evening was in honour of little Nora's
début.

From henceforth she knew that invitations to dances and parties of all
sorts would pour in and have to be accepted; and something within her
whispered that ere long the crown of this world's folly would get so
firmly set on her head that it would be difficult to detach it.

"How was it," she asked herself impatiently, that even as she descended
the stairs, "the Wishing-Well, with all its surroundings, rose so
clearly in memory's eye?" Was the life she was about to enter on the
best preparation for becoming what she had wished for that day, of
seeking what her mother had desired she might possess—the "wisdom which
is above rubies"?

Just then the postman's bell rang, and before she entered the
ball-room, a servant, silver salver in hand, gave her a letter.

"From uncle," she said to Clara. "I'll not read it till the party is
over;" but even as she spoke, her eyes rested on the words, "In haste."

A feeling of deadly faintness came over her, and, seizing Mr. Ross's
arm, who had come out of the room to look for Clara, she said, "Oh,
please take me to the library for a moment; I fear there is something
wrong at Benvourd."

And so it proved. In a few words Mr. Macleod told that Minnie, the only
girl and pet of the house, lay at the gates of death.

"She has asked for you, Nora, more than once. We hardly like to say
'Come;' yet we know how much you love her. Your aunt is fairly worn out
with grief and three nights' watching, and I can only say your presence
would be a comfort to us all."

Impatiently Nora threw aside the letter and unfastened the string of
pearls round her neck, her only ornament.

"How could uncle doubt I would come! Minnie, my pet Minnie, dying,
and I not there! Mr. Ross, I must start at once; the last coach north
starts in an hour; I know all about it. Uncle went by it the last time
he was here. Please let Williams get me a cab. I'll be ready in a few
minutes."

Mr. Ross interrupted her. "Nora, you cannot go to-night; think of the
hour—and alone, too—it is out of the question. I am very sorry for you,
dear; just wait till morning, and I will take you back myself. Don't
cry, child; your cousin may not be so very ill; naturally a father gets
easily alarmed. Just come away, and try to enjoy yourself; this is your
first grown-up ball, you know, and—"

But the indignant flash in Nora's eyes stopped him. "Dance, when Minnie
is dying, Mr. Ross! And those who have been as father and mother to me
are in such grief! Surely you do not mean it. Not for all the balls in
the world would I remain away an hour longer from them than I could
help. Please do not detain me, or you will break my heart. I can go
alone. As you said this morning, I am a woman now, and surely am to be
trusted. I do not wish to take any one away from the party; perhaps
Susan will come with me to the coach, if she can be spared."

Mr. Ross stood a moment undecided; but seeing that Nora was resolute,
he said kindly, "Well, well—I daresay you are right. Go and get ready;
we'll catch the coach yet; and I'll speak to Mrs. Ross. Alick must take
my place to-night, and I'll take you to Benvourd myself."

The packing was quickly accomplished, Clara helping and comforting her
cousin as much as she could, for in truth she felt for her.

"Poor little Minnie," she said, for Clara knew and loved the little
one. "How terribly sad it will be if she dies. O Nora, I don't believe
she will. Keep up your heart, dear; she'll get round yet."

Nora's tears were falling fast, but she faltered out the words, "If
she dies, Clara, it won't be sad for her; she loves Jesus with all her
heart, and he'll take care of her. But oh, how auntie and uncle and all
of us will miss her. She was my special pet, my little Minnie."

Mrs. Ross came to help. She was put out at this sudden break-up of
plans; and although sorry for Nora, still the worldly life she led
had in part hardened her heart, and she wished heartily that the ball
had been over ere the bad news had come. But she helped forward the
packing, bade Nora an affectionate farewell, and telling her husband
to come back as soon as possible, she resumed her preparations for the
ball.

Wearily sped the hours of the night as the travellers drove along.
With a sickening heart, Nora watched the sun rise over the distant
hills, wondering all the while whether the spirit of the little child
she loved so well had already entered the land "that needeth not the
sun;" and in the coach, with strangers around her, Nora prayed as she
had never done before—prayed for the life of her little cousin—prayed
a very earnest prayer for herself, that God would answer her in these
prayers for Christ's sake, and make her truly his child, even as little
Minnie was.

It was midnight of the following day before they reached Benvourd, to
find Mr. Macleod awaiting them, with the strange, sad light on his
countenance that one sometimes sees on the faces of those who have
stood by the death-bed of dying Christians, whether that of an aged
saint or a little lamb of the Good Shepherd's flock.

"Thank God you have come!" he said, as he folded Nora in his arms.
Hushing as best he could the girl's burst of heart-felt grief, as he
gently whispered the words, "Jesus has taken our little daughter to his
heavenly fold; she was glad to go, Nora, she loved him so. Hush, my
darling—compose yourself—it is well with her; the loss is ours. You are
greatly needed here, my child."

He had half carried her into the parlour, and laid her down on the
sofa. Quietly he stood by for a few minutes, with bent head and lowered
eyes, letting her give vent to the tears which come so easily from
hearts in their first sorrow, and which bring such blessed relief.

Mr. Ross stood by much touched; there was something in the quiet,
resigned, though sorely-stricken look on the father's face that made
him wonder.

"Thank you for bringing her," had been the courteous greeting he had
received; but now, in this sacred sorrow, he felt almost an intruder.

"She must be terribly exhausted," he said, as Nora lay almost stifled
with sobbing; "she has hardly tasted food to-day."

Her uncle bent over her lovingly. "My Nora," he said, "be brave; help
us to say, 'Thy will be done.' Your poor aunt will need all your help.
There have been two angels here this evening, darling—one of death and
one of life. One hour after our darling fell asleep in Jesus, God sent
us another little daughter to comfort us."

In a moment Nora was on her feet. "O uncle, take me to aunt; I will be
brave, indeed I will, God helping me," she added.

And amid all his sorrow, these words sent a thrill of joy through Mr.
Macleod's heart, for hitherto Nora had seemed to feel that she could do
all things in her own strength; but in the bitter hours of sorrow, and
self-reproach, and self-examination through which she had passed that
day, she had been brought to see her own weakness as never before.

Very softly she slipped into her aunt's room, and bent for a moment
over the bed.

"Auntie, dear auntie, I've come," she said; but despite her efforts at
self-control, one hot tear fell on the pallid face as she kissed the
soft cheek.

A quiet, feeble voice said, "'The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken
away: blessed be the name of the Lord.'"

No more words were allowed to be spoken then; and Nora, forcing back
her blinding tears, turned to look at the babe who had come as a little
messenger of comfort into the house of mourning.

But Nora would not rest that night till she had taken one look at
Minnie as she lay beautiful in death. A smile seemed to rest on the
little lips, and the golden hair still lay in curls round the fair
face; and as the girl kissed the cold brow, she fancied she saw it
already crowned with the everlasting crown which is fairer far than any
earthly one of gold and rubies.



CHAPTER X.

A HIGHLAND FIELD-PREACHING.

   "We bear you the message, the Lamb's invitation;
    The rude world's rude clamour, it floateth above:
    Oh join the sweet song, the glad song of salvation,
    And rest 'neath His banner, the Banner of Love."

RIGHT down on Minnie's grave in the Highland churchyard the autumn
sunbeams were playing, as Nora, some months after her hasty return to
Benvourd, stood there wondering, as so many young hearts have done
before her, how the sun could shine and all nature look bright when
Minnie was dead. Yet inwardly the young girl was glad too, with a
great, quiet, solemn joy; for in her heart light and peace had sprung
up, and a sunshine, of which the world knows nothing, was filling the
chambers of her soul. The doubting and indecision were ended at last;
the neutral flag under which Nora had long tried to fight was put
aside; and the young girl had taken her stand as one of the followers
of the Lord Jesus, and joined the army over which floated the banner of
the King of kings.

The long, sad summer after Minnie's death was merging into early
autumn, and the birches and oak trees in the lovely pass were beginning
to glow in golden and scarlet hues, when up the glen came the news
that a field-preaching was to take place at a spot not very far from
Benvourd House. The great out-of-door preachings were not so common in
that neighbourhood as in many other parts of the Highlands; and partly
from the novelty of the thing, partly from the fame of the preacher,
the young, noble-hearted minister, William Burns, Nora desired strongly
to go, and her uncle willingly agreed to accompany her.

Brightly shone the sun that day, and every blade of grass and remaining
tuft of heather sparkled under its rays, as the party from Benvourd set
off to the place of meeting. It was a good way off; but both Nora and
her uncle were famous pedestrians, and fully enjoyed the walk on that
quiet early Sabbath morn. The impression made on her heart by Minnie's
early death had never worn completely off; the longing after higher and
more satisfying joys than the world could give was still filling the
girl's heart; the soil was soft, prepared, though she knew it not, by
the great Creator for the ready reception of the words which, by the
lips of his faithful messenger, were to prove that day to many souls
the savour of life.

As the party neared the place of meeting, Nora was surprised to see so
many people coming in all directions over the moors, where the heather
was already turning brown. Across half-reaped fields of golden corn,
down the steep hill-sides, they came, all looking eager, though with
the calm hush of the Sabbath day about them.

"Uncle, where does all that multitude of people come from?" said Nora,
as she looked in amazement at the crowd, as they congregated at the
river-side, waiting for the ferry-boat to cross and recross with the
many passengers; for the gathering-place was on the opposite side of
the river from Benvourd.

Her uncle smiled. "You may well ask that, Nora. The greater number
of these people have come from places miles distant, and some must
have walked for hours to get here so early. God grant that not mere
curiosity has brought them, but a hunger for the bread of life."

Just then the ferry-boat reached the bank of the river where they
stood, and Mr. Macleod and his niece stepped into it, along with
several others.

"You're getting hard Sabbath work to-day, Sandy," said Mr. Macleod,
addressing his old friend the ferryman.

"Ay, ay, sir," was the ready reply, spoken in the Gaelic language;
"but it's blessed work too, for if half that we hear is true, it's
the Lord's own message that will be given to-day, and na doot many o'
Satan's captives will be set free. The ferry work is one o' necessity
and mercy, I'm thinking; and the Lord'll no' hold us guilty for doin'
that kind o' work on his holy day. Not one penny o' payment will old
Sandy take for this work. Yon's a grand sicht, sir."

And as he spoke he pointed to the hill-side, just above the spot where
the meeting was to be held. Already it was crowded with people, and the
sound of psalm-singing was wafted to the river—

   "O come, let us sing to the Lord:
      Come, let us every one
    A joyful noise make to the Rock
      Of our salvation."

Young and old, rich and poor were grouped there, the grass and the
heather their carpet, and the blue arched sky their roof, while a small
mountain cascade, as it leaped from rock to rock over-canopied by the
rowan trees, mingled its music with that of the slight breeze and the
chorus of strong voices. The scarlet cloaks and white caps of some of
the older women, and the checked shepherd's plaids of the men, all
formed a picture that would not soon die out of memory's eye.

But now the preacher stood in their midst, and with a voice of power,
and eyes that once seen were never to be forgotten, addressed the crowd.

We will not here write details of that wonderful service, the words of
which burned into the very souls of some of the hearers, and by the
power of the Holy Spirit changed the lives of many. The subject was
the parable of the ten virgins. Five were wise, and five were foolish.
Vividly were they described; powerfully the utter folly of those who
had lamps, but had no oil in them, was depicted, as having a name
to live, yet Satan-bound, Satan-deluded, Satan-possessed. Then the
contrast was drawn—the peace and joy of the wise virgins, united to
Jesus, and so, with well-filled, clearly-burning lamps, ready when he
calls to go into the marriage feast with him.

No mere description can rightly convey the power of that sermon, for
every word seemed freighted with the power of the Holy Ghost convicting
and converting. Truly the arrows of the Lord pierced sharply that day
into the hearts of his enemies, and chain-bound ones groaning under
the fetters of the Evil One were freed, and left the meeting, like the
Ethiopian of old, "going on their way rejoicing."

And what of Nora? Not even the uncle sitting beside her knew of the
conflict in her heart; no spoken words told of the surrender of heart
and life into her Saviour's keeping. Yet the Lord of glory knew of it.

And when the long-waiting, patient Emmanuel entered into that young
heart by the door which was flung open for his admittance, and took
possession, a new song of praise rang through the courts of heaven,
and angels, amid the many songs of joy which they sang that day over
ransomed souls, did not leave out a special one for the young orphan
girl who had passed from death unto life under the preaching of God's
own Word at the field-meeting in the lonely Highland glen.

And when Nora lay down to rest that night, there played on her lips a
smile of God's own peace, and on her brow, it may be, the angel-host
could see the shadow of a crown more beautiful far than any earthly one
of gold and rubies. And when, ere many days elapsed, Ronald received
a letter from his dearly-beloved sister, telling the glad news of her
new-found peace in Jesus, his lips also gave praise to God for the
answer to many prayers, both of those who were still on earth and of
those who had passed within the veil, yet whose prayers had been laid
upon the golden altar, to be answered when the great Answerer of prayer
saw fit.

And as Ronald read her account of the words which had pierced her
heart, and the description of the preacher of them, he wondered if it
could be the same person who, in his Master's name, had enlisted him as
a recruit in the army of the Lord of hosts, bound for the great crusade
against Satan. In some things the description agreed, in others not;
and as he never met on earth again the mysterious stranger, he never
knew if indeed it was William Burns who had spoken to him beside the
Wishing-Well.



CHAPTER XI.

HOME LIFE.

   "Every day and every hour,
    Every gift and every power,
    Consecrate to Him alone
    Who hath claimed you for His own."

MORE than two years have passed since the death of little Minnie
Macleod. Life at Benvourd has gone quietly on. Little duties, little
cares, and what some would call little pleasures, made up the daily
routine of the lives of most of the inhabitants of the neighbourhood.

And yet both in nature and the souls of the inmates of the glen there
was growth. Not very visible, perhaps, to an unobservant eye, still
the young trees in the pass were reaching upwards, and, all unseen,
their roots were striking deeper down, enabling them the better to bear
unharmed the wild winter blasts that from time to time swept over them.
The river also, though almost imperceptibly, was deepened, the large
boulder stones in its channel were getting more firmly fixed in their
places than of yore. And in the souls of many of the dwellers there,
the words of gospel truth, sown on the September day we have written
of, at the field-meeting, were springing up, "first the blade, then the
ear," one day to ripen into full corn.

And so it was in Nora's soul: from strength to strength she was going
on, ripening gradually in the wisdom which cometh from above, expanding
into a noble Christian character—a comfort in her home, and amongst the
poor proving a true counsellor and friend.

Snow was on the ground, and a keen, frosty wind was blowing, when one
morning she came into the drawing-room at Benvourd, equipped for a
walk, fur cuffs on her arms, fur around her neck, and a leather bag in
her hand. Very pretty she looked as she peeped in.

"Any messages, auntie?" she said. "I'm off to see old nurse and some,
of the poor bodies; and I'll look into the school on my way back, and
see how the children are getting on with their work."

"All right, dear," was the reply; "only, do not get cold. And take
Cherry with you for company."

"How bright and happy Nora looks," Mrs. Macleod remarked to her
husband, as he entered the room shortly after the young girl had set
off on her walk.

"Yes," he said; "and yet I had a letter this morning from Mrs. Ross,
asking if I did not think it was a mistake to keep Nora moped up
here all the winter, when she should be mixing in society and seeing
something of the world. Of course an invitation to spend the winter
with them follows; and, if you agree with me, I have resolved to let
Nora choose for herself."

"Surely she does not look either dull or moped. But if she wishes a
change, she shall have it."

In the meantime Nora was tripping down the pass with a glad heart.
Never, she thought, had she seen the whole country more beautiful than
it looked that day: the snow-crowned hills glistening in the sunlight,
and the leafless trees, now sprinkled with snow, glittering like
diamonds as the merry little sunbeams played on them, and the river,
swollen with the melting snow, rolling swiftly along, making music
through the lonely pass. Moping, indeed! The firm step and bright,
sparkling eye of the girl told the falsity of that supposition.

Warmly was she welcomed by old nurse. Not long had she been in
discovering the change that had taken place in her darling's heart; and
many a time now, as she stroked back the golden brown locks off the
broad brow, she loved to think that a fairer diadem than that of this
world would one day rest there.

On the morning we write of, a more than usually hearty welcome greeted
Nora.

"Come in, come in, my lambkin; I'm wantin' sore to see ye. Look ye
here; I've had news o' my puir misguided laddie. He's livin', Miss
Nora, sore broke down, they write, in mind an' body, but ower prood to
say a word to his auld grannie, wha loes him dearly yet, in spite o' a'
his faults."

"How got I the news, you ask? Weel, ye see, it's this Duncan Finlay;
ye'll mind o' him?—Jean Finlay's son, doon the glen. Weel, he's been in
furrin pairts, a sailor lad; an' in the ship comin' hame, wha should
he see but Johnny—my Johnny—workin' his passage hame (for it seems
he's been i' the Indies, puir laddie); and when he saw Duncan, he made
him promise he'd no tell ony o' his folk where he was, or what he was
daein'."

"An' at first Duncan had kind o' agreed to that; but when they were
nearin' England, Johnny fell sick, an' Duncan has been rale kind to
him, got him intil lodgin's, an' tended him like a brither. But my
puir laddie's gettin' nee better; an' noo Duncan feels he canna' keep
silence ony langer, an' so he wrote to his mither to tell her a'
this—And oh, Miss Nora, he says, for a' Johnny appears hardened-like to
his hame, he thinks his heart turns fondly to his auld grannie still:
for in his sleep, he ca's for me, an' speaks aboot the auld hills an'
the bonny pass, whiles fancyin' he's helpin the gentry to fish i' the
river, or gangin' wi' them as he's dune mony a time ower the muirs
when they're shootin' the grouse. An' aince, missie, only think Duncan
writes—" and as she spoke, tears ran down the old woman's cheeks—"he
thocht he was in the kirk, an' began singin' oot the words o' the
psalm, 'The Lord's my shepherd, I'll not want.'"

"'Deed, Miss Nora, my heart's fair like to break, when I think o' my
bairn lyin' in yon great city, among strangers noo; for Duncan has to
leave to join his ship again. An' since it's the Lord's will, I canna
get to him, I've been thinkin', if only you would write to Maister
Ronald, he'd seek him oot and comfort him a bit. See, here's the
address I've gotten frae Duncan."

Nora looked at it. "Oh yes, nurse," she said; "I'll write at once to
Ronald; I know he and my cousin, Mr. Arbuthnot, often visit among the
lodging-houses in London; and Ronald will be so pleased if he can
help poor Johnny in any way. Keep up your spirits, nurse; perhaps the
illness may be God's way of drawing poor Johnny to himself."

"Ay, ay," was the old woman's reply. "I'm trustin' in him, missie; the
Good Shepherd goes into the wilderness after his errin' sheep, an'
sometimes, even against their will, carries them home to the fold in
his ain lovin' arms. And ye'll write soon, missie, an' tell me whenever
ye hear?"

"That I will," said Nora, rising; "but I must run off now, for I have
one or two sick people to see down the glen, and auntie told me not to
linger too long."

And calling Cherry to come away from the cosy fire, she set off, having
cheered up by her bright looks and loving words the heart of the old
woman.

Through the pass she wound her way, now running a bit with Cherry, now
pausing to look at the river as it danced along, or to note the little
birds as they hopped about from spray to spray, picking at the bright
berries that yet remained.

Then turning out of the pass, she crossed the highroad, and entered a
small cottage in a field, where dwelt a sick child, nigh unto death;
but at the sight of the bright young face, she looked up with a smile.
Nora produced some little delicacy out of the leather bag, to tempt the
failing appetite; then seating herself beside the bed, began, at the
child's request, to "sing to her something about heaven."

In the rich, sweet voice with which God had endowed her, she sang of
the land where hunger and thirst, pain and sickness are felt no more,
and where—

   "Christ's presence fills each heart with joy,
      Tunes every mouth to sing."

And the sweet singing soothed the restless child, and brought a smile
of peace to her lips; and when, with a word of prayer, the visit ended,
and Nora was out again on the snow-covered earth, the child lay and
thought of her bright young visitor and of the happy land of which she
had sung.

One or two more visits of love, and then Nora turned into the village
school, the face of the teacher lighting up as she entered. She had a
kind, merry word for all, praised some and gently chid others; then sat
right down among the workers, and told them a story over which eyes
that were beginning to look weary sparkled again, and to which the
teacher herself listened as eagerly as the little ones. Then followed
a simple hymn about the "Happy Land," in which the voices of even the
very little ones chimed in sweetly.

And once again Nora was off, having left a good influence behind her.
She had had a happy day and an adventure as well; for just as she was
leaving the pass, who should she meet but two young girls, nieces
of their neighbour, Mrs. Forbes, who, along with their governess,
were going to Benvourd with an invitation for her to spend a week
at Craiglora, to meet some friends from England who had arrived
unexpectedly.

The girls had come so far in the carriage, and were to walk through the
pass to Benvourd, but had contrived to take a wrong turn, and being
strangers to that part of the country, were wandering about in great
perplexity when they met Nora and her dog.

"No doubt," said one of them, "if you had not met us, we would have
been benighted, and, perhaps, perished in the snow!"

Nora had laughed at that idea, but made a good joke about the
travellers who had lost their way in the Highland pass.

They did not return with her to Benvourd, as they had lost so much
time, and were to await the carriage again at a house not far from the
pass.

So Nora returned as she had gone out—alone. She looked so bright and
merry, as in her eager way she related the day's work, that her uncle
and aunt smiled to each other as they thought of Mrs. Ross's idea that
she was "moped" in her Highland home. All were much interested as she
related that nurse had at last heard of her wandering grandson; and
tears of sympathy filled Mrs. Macleod's eyes when she told of the dying
child who had asked her to sing about heaven, and her thoughts turned
to her little daughter so early called to glory.

In the evening Mr. Macleod gave Nora Mrs. Ross's letter, and told her,
he and her aunt gave her full liberty to accept the invitation, if she
felt at all inclined to do so.

"We will miss our bright sunbeam," he said, "but only desire that in
this matter you should please yourself."

Nora read the letter, laughing over the idea of her moping. "Why,
uncle, what does she mean? I am as happy as I can possibly be; and I
have so many things to interest me, and people to love, I could not
manage to be dull."

Then she said seriously, "Uncle if I am to answer this invitation as
I wish, I would really rather not go—at the present, at all events.
I know I would have many temptations there to which I am not exposed
here; and although I believe Jesus would enable me to resist them,
still—" and she lowered her eyes as she spoke—"I am only a beginner
yet in the Christian life, and I am fearful I might not prove a loyal
banner-bearer in that household. No, uncle; if you and auntie will keep
me yet a bit, I would rather not go; though I do wish to go to Mrs.
Forbes' if I may. I do so love the dear old lady; and the girls are so
nice also. Dull, indeed I only wish Clara were one half as happy a girl
as I am! Uncle, I do think people can't be really happy till they have
learned to love Jesus. I am sure, when I think of what I was two years
ago and what I am now, I can sing truly—"

   "'Oh happy day, that fixed my choice
     On thee, my Saviour and my God!'"

Her uncle drew her into his arms and kissed her tenderly.

"Thank God you can say that, Nora. I do believe your dear mother's
prayers are answered for you, that you might be led to seek after the
wisdom that is better far than gold and rubies."



CHAPTER XII.

SOUGHT AND FOUND.

   "Ring the bells of heaven! There is joy to-day,
    For the wanderer now is reconciled:
    Yes! A soul is rescued from his sinful way,
    And is born anew—a ransomed child!"

OUR scene changes from the Highland glen to a large mercantile house in
the city of London. It was three o'clock on a winter day, and the gas
had already been lighted indoors and in the streets; but work was going
on busily yet. Clerks were running here and there giving orders to the
many porters who stood awaiting them, while several still worked hard
at the desks to which they had been chained for hours.

The season was a busy one, and work-hours were longer than usual
then; but there was no look of discontent on the faces—visions of
holiday-time and Christmas were rising before most and cheering them
on. Besides, the heads of that firm had always a kindly word for their
employes. Here and there, in a pause of the busy work, the young men
might be heard discussing their plans for the coming evening or the
approaching Christmas week.

"I'm off to the theatre to-night," said one, addressing a
gentle-looking lad who sat beside him. "Will you come with me, Farran?
There is a famous new actor to appear, and the play is a good one.
There's no use asking Macintosh or any of his set, for they never go;
they're a dull lot. But you're different. Besides, you've seen so
little of the world, it will do you a deal of good. Say yes, and I'll
manage about a ticket."

The lad thus addressed hardly seemed to hear the question put to him,
for just then he was looking fixedly at a neighbouring desk, at which
sat a handsome young man, with a look of quiet joy on his face that
told of a heart at peace.

Then he turned quickly, as if awakening out of a dream. "A dull lot,
did you say, Perkins? Then Macintosh does not belong to it. He is
always so happy; you never see him sulking and disagreeable, like some
of the other fellows. I was just looking at him now, and wondering how
he contrives always to be so cheerful?"

"Oh, well, I suppose he's happy enough. I bear him no ill-will, but I
hate cant. Now, what about the theatre? Let us leave Macintosh alone;
he can go his way, we'll go ours. A short life and a merry, say I!"

Farran hesitated; he liked neither the tone of his companion's voice
nor the words he spoke. Was it merely his own thoughts, or did
whispered words really reach his ear—"If sinners entice thee, consent
thou not"?

In any case, the effect was the same. A whitewashed house in a country
village rose before his eyes; and there, with a bunch of pure white
roses in her hand, stood his gentle, loving, widowed mother as he had
seen her last, when she said farewell to him, and repeated the very
words which now sounded in his ears:

"My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not."

He turned to his companion, and in a tone of decision said, "Thanks,
Perkins, for your offer of a ticket to the theatre, but I would rather
not go. I am not ashamed to confess that I know my doing so would
grieve the most loving-hearted mother that ever a lad possessed; and
so, although she never said to me not to go, still I believe she
trusted me to respect her wishes in this matter, and I mean, God
helping me, to do it. You know I am the only son of my mother, and she
is a widow."

Perkins's only answer was a low whistle of contempt, and any further
conversation was stopped by the head of the firm, Mr. Arbuthnot,
tapping young Farran on the shoulder. "Look here," he said, "I have to
go off in a hurry; take this letter to Macintosh, and tell him I forgot
to give it to him when I was speaking to him just now. It came for him
just after he had left the house this morning. See, he has left his
desk and moved to the other end!"

Farran rose to fulfil Mr. Arbuthnot's order.

Macintosh took the letter with thanks, then began to speak to Farran.
"It seems strange," he said, "that we two, who spend our days in the
same place, have never yet exchanged words. My cousin told me that
you were, like myself, from the country—a stranger in London. If your
Saturdays are not always engaged, would you join me in a walk? It is
pleasant on the Heath if the day be fine. Say, to-morrow?"

Farran gave a hearty response to the proposal, adding, "I often long
for a breath of country air in this smoky town, but walking alone is
stupid work."

And so a friendship, which we have not time to follow out, was struck
up between these two; and to Ronald was given once more the joy of
lending a hand to hold up the faltering steps of a weak child of God,
who had well-nigh slipped amidst the temptations of a crowded city and
the attractions of thoughtless companions.

Ere long Farran could write to his mother that he "believed that God
had given him Ronald Macintosh as a friend and companion in answer to
her prayers." And who shall say that it was not even so?

Snow fell on the evening of the day we are writing of, and the children
at many a window in the comfortable houses of luxury in the west of
London watched with delight the merry snowflakes, as they called
them, as they fell whirling about with every breath of air. All over
the great city they fell, covering up the dirt in the crowded, dingy
streets and courts, as well as whitening the large parks and gardens.

Very fast they seemed to fall on the window-sill of a poor
lodging-house, where a lad, sick unto death, tossed from side to side
on his comfortless bed. Far from home and friends, he lay forsaken and
desolate, reaping the bitter harvest of a wasted life, experiencing
even now the truth of the Scripture words, that "the wages of sin is
death;" "the way of transgressors is hard." Yes, he felt it now; and
somehow it seemed to him as if the little snowflakes were repeating the
words to him over and over again: "The way of transgressors is hard."
No other words would come just then to his memory; but before his eyes
floated a far-off vision of a lowly Highland hut, and an old woman, and
of just such a snowy winter day, when he had stolen away from his happy
home, enticed by wild companions, to escape the dull life, as they
termed it, of the Highland glen, and try his fortune in the great city.

He had not meant then to leave his home and kind grandmother for ever.
He had had visions of making a fortune, and returning to keep her in
comfort in her old age. But the wrong step taken, he gradually fell,
first into ways of idleness, and then into worse ways; had roamed about
from land to land, weary and unsatisfied, till now he lay dying in a
comfortless London lodging-house, his only friend obliged to leave
him, while he had refused to let him tell his Scotch friends anything
about him. So now, he said to himself, there was no help for it—he must
die. Scripture words of hope, blessed invitations of love from God's
own lips, were well known to him; his Scotch Bible education had left
him no stranger to those words of psalms and paraphrases sung in the
quiet country church on Sabbath days. They often rose to memory. But he
refused to take the comfort; he said they were not for him. He could
join the many in saying, "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have
turned every one to his own way;" but as yet he stopped there.

And so on that winter evening he lay, before his eyes a picture of
high mountains, on which the snowflakes were falling even then, and in
his ears the rush of the Highland river as it dashed through the pass,
near which stood the home of his childhood. Oh, to see it once again!
To hear, but for one moment, the dearly-loved accents of the Gaelic
tongue, to him sweeter and more melodious than any other language in
the world—to feel once again the loving hand of his grandmother laid on
his brow, as she was wont to do in his boyish days when she gave him
her goodnight blessing!

As he thought of these things, the tears fell fast, and an agony of
bitter repentance filled his heart; and for the first time the words,
spoken in what to those around him was an unknown language, broke from
his lips, "God be merciful to me sinner!"

The landlord of the house, who had strolled in at that moment, heard
the words, and turned hastily away. He said to himself, "I do wish some
friend would turn up; that lad Finlay said he had written to his people
in the north."

But the words had struck on the ear of a young man who was just
entering the room, after having asked "if a lad called John Robertson
lodged there."

Quickly he strode to the bedside, and spoke a few words in the same
strange language. They seemed to act like a charm on the sick lad. He
raised himself in bed, a bright light sparkling in his eyes, and said,
but not in Gaelic, "Who are you, sir? And where do you come from? Oh,
speak again in my native tongue, that I may make sure that it is not
all a dream!"

Then ensued a conversation in Gaelic, which it is well I am not called
upon to write, or my readers to peruse; but every word of the strange
guttural language sounded as soothing music in the ear of the dying
lad. Great was his surprise when he discovered that the handsome young
gentleman beside him was the Master Macintosh with whom he had often
climbed the hills and fished in the river near his northern home.

Not long had Ronald to tend the dying lad, for his days were numbered;
but to him was given the joy of being used as God's instrument to set
free one of Satan's fettered captives. To the cry for pardon, which
were the first words that had greeted his ear, he could give, in all
their fulness, the Lord's words of free forgiveness, could tell how
Jesus "came to seek and to save them that were lost."

And the heavy, sin-sick heart grasped with a firm grip the precious
promise, "He that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out."

And so, even at the eleventh hour, Johnny Robertson fell at the feet of
his mother's Saviour, and was able to say:

   "My Lord and my God!"

   "Herein indeed is love, not that I loved God, but that he loved me."

"Tell grannie," he said, "her and my mother's prayers are answered now,
even to me, the chief of sinners. Sing to me, Master Macintosh, once
more the psalm I used to sing wi' grannie, and at the kirk, with the
high hills around—'The Lord's my shepherd.'"

And when Ronald came to the words, "Yea, though I walk through death's
dark vale, yet will I fear none ill: for thou art with me—" a feeble
voice broke in, in the lad's native tongue, "That's so, that's so."

One deep-drawn breath, and the soul of the Highland laddie was with the
Lord.

They buried him in an old London grave-yard around which the hum of
busy life was perpetually heard; far from home and kindred he lay,
miles and miles away from the calm quiet of the grand old hills which
overshadowed his childhood's home. A single stone, put up by Ronald,
marked his resting-place, and on it were the words, "With the Lord."

There were tears shed in the quiet hut over the letter which told of
the death of the wandering one; but they were not all bitter: joy
mingled with the grief—the erring child was at rest now in the Father's
house above.

"The Lord is a promise-keeping God," said the old woman. "The Good
Shepherd has gone into the wilderness after the lost sheep, and borne
it safely back to the fold. For ever blessed be his holy name. And may
his blessing rest on the head of the young lad who sought him out, and
soothed his lonely dying bed, by telling him of that hidden treasure
which is better than gold and above rubies."



CHAPTER XIII.

THE COUSINS.

  "From that day I knew him—
     Christ, my Priest and King,
   Father, Friend, Physician—
     Can I cease to sing?
   Nay, until he call me
     From my work below,
   I will tell his praises
     Wheresoe'er I go."

"ALONE, mamma! Must I go alone?" said Clara Ross in a low, discontented
tone, as her mother told her the doctor's opinion that, after the long,
weakening illness from which she was just recovering, a change of air
was absolutely necessary, especially now, when the east winds, so
trying to invalids in Edinburgh, were blowing.

"He recommends the Bridge of Allan," she said; "and your father and I
have arranged that you shall go next week. Not alone," she replied, in
answer to Clara's query; "Maria will go with you. It will certainly be
a trial for your sisters to dispense with her aid at this gay season
of the year, for she certainly dresses their hair beautifully; but,
of course; they must make the sacrifice when your health demands it,
although, I fear, I will have to endure their reproaches when they hear
of the arrangement. It is unfortunate that I cannot go with you myself;
but, of course, it is my duty to accompany Laura and Jane to the public
balls, and then the two dances in our house come on, so I have no
choice. Poor Clara! How grieved you will be at missing all the spring
gaiety! What! Crying, child? Well, well, never mind; the doctor says
you will soon be as strong as ever, and you'll enjoy the balls all the
more next year."

Clara pushed aside fretfully the hand her mother laid on her brow. "It
isn't that," she said. "I was tired of balls and visiting night after
night long before this illness came on; but oh! I don't want to be sent
away alone with only a servant. Couldn't Aunt Emmie chaperon the girls,
and you come with me, mamma?"

But such a proposal by no means satisfied the worldly mother. "Now,
Clara, you must be reasonable. You know the calls of duty must be
attended to; a mother must look after the interests of her children.
I am sorry to have to send you away at all, more especially as your
father has peculiar ideas about it; so don't let him see how unhappy
you are."

And so saying, Mrs. Ross moved away to superintend some household
matter.

She was not an unkind or even careless mother. In her own way she loved
and was proud of her children. But her one ambition for them was a
comfortable settlement in life; the things seen and temporal filled her
heart, and a life of worldliness was making her cold and selfish.

That night, when Clara had gone to bed, the subject of the visit to the
Bridge of Allan was warmly discussed in the drawing-room, where Mr. and
Mrs. Ross sat with their daughters.

Mr. Ross spoke angrily. "On one thing I have made up my mind—the girl
shall not go alone. If her own mother cannot leave home, and her
sisters are too selfish to do so, I shall give up a month's business
and go myself. You girls will have to do with fewer fine dresses,
that's all; for I will have to pay a gentleman handsomely to act for
me. But I will not have my little Clara neglected for all the dresses
in the world; so when you fix on the lodgings, take a room for me also."

A look of consternation passed between mother and daughters, and in one
breath they exclaimed.

"But, papa—Mr. Ross—you forget we are to have two dances in the house
next week, and you must not be absent—it is impossible. Think of your
duty to your family, my dear," added Mrs. Ross.

But the only answer vouchsafed was, "Well, my dear, to tell the truth,
I have doubted for long whether my countenancing a constant round of
gaiety and frivolity was indeed my real duty to my family. And when I
see the result of such a life, in rendering my daughters selfish and
unkind, I doubt it still more. We have higher duties to fulfil than
merely living to ourselves, and I pray God he may teach us all to see
it ere it be too late."

If a bombshell had fallen in the midst of the little company, it could
not have caused greater fear and astonishment than did Mr. Ross's
speech. Higher duties to fulfil than living a life of pleasure! Why,
that was the way religious people like the Macleods talked; and surely
papa was not turning one of their sort!

Mrs. Ross was sorely put out, but not so much astonished as her
daughters. Ever since the time, now four years ago, that Mr. Ross had
accompanied Nora Macintosh to Benvourd House, on the night of little
Minnie's death, she had observed a difference in his way of speaking of
religion, and also a growing dislike to the constant gaiety which went
on in their house. She had shut her eyes to the fact, and was glad that
the girls never appeared to observe it. So now she felt she must act
cautiously, and said abruptly she would think over the matter, and see
what arrangement could be made. One thing was certain—Mr. Ross must on
no account be obliged to leave his business.

The next morning found her at the breakfast-table with a radiant face.
An idea had occurred to her, which, if agreed to, would please all
parties.

"Papa," she said, addressing her husband by the name he bore in the
family circle, "I have been so troubled about dear Clara all night; and
as there seems a difficulty about either myself or the girls leaving
home at present, how would it do to ask Nora Macintosh, of whom Clara
is so fond, to visit her at the Bridge of Allan, and so provide her
with a pleasant companion?"

Mr. Ross's brow lightened—for indeed it would have been a loss to him
to leave town just then—and he said eagerly, "That would be a capital
plan. My mind would be at ease, if Clara had such a pleasant, sensible
friend with her as Nora Macintosh. And as she has been brought up not
to please herself only, I doubt not, if she can be spared from her home
duties, she will go. By all means write and ask her."

And so it fell out, after a few days' delay, that Nora Macintosh found
herself installed in comfortable lodgings at the Bridge of Allan, as
companion-nurse to her cousin Clara.

In complying with the request she had to make a sacrifice of no small
kind; for the same post had brought her an invitation from Lady Dudley
to spend the ensuing month with her in her English home, as she had
long desired to become acquainted with the sister of her little boy's
favourite friend, and also with the child of the Elenora Macintosh of
whom she had heard so much.

Inclination said: "Go; this is just what you have long been desiring,
and it would never do to refuse." Duty said: "Decline for the present;
your cousin is ill, and longs for your society."

It was a struggle, we must confess; but Nora had been too long a
servant of the One who came to earth not to be ministered unto, but
to minister, and who has left his disciples the command to deny
themselves, to hesitate long. And so the English visit was put off for
the present, and Nora went to cheer up her invalid cousin.

And a pleasant six weeks' visit she had, as she afterwards told her
aunt. Spring buds were opening, and light spring breezes, and soft,
though often flitting sunshine, brought joy to the bright young heart
of the healthy girl, and returning vigour to Clara's still delicate
frame. Never before had the cousins so much enjoyed being together; and
much pleasant girlish talk was interchanged. But though Nora at first
said little to her cousin as regarded the change she had experienced
since they last met, Clara was not long in discovering the quiet light
in Nora's eyes—the look of rest, so different from the unsatisfied one
which at times she had worn in the days gone by. All testified to "a
heart at peace with God."

And, moreover, Nora preached by her life; the unselfish spirit, the
kind, loving words, the deep reverence for God's Word and for his holy
day, all told from what source the peace and joy came. And somehow—as
Clara told her father in one of his hurried visits, to see how the two
girls were getting on—although Nora never sermonized her, or brought
forth her own opinions, still she was never ashamed to speak of the
love of Jesus, and to claim him as her own friend.

As she spoke these words, Mr. Ross bent over her and said, "Thank
God, we may all claim Jesus as our Friend, if we will take him as our
Saviour. I've been long in finding it out; but I have found it, my
child, though at the eleventh hour. Seek you him, my child, while you
are still young, and the same joy and peace which Nora has got will be
yours also."

Clara's tears fell fast as her father spoke, for, indeed, for months
past she had been weary and dissatisfied with her profitless life,
and a longing after higher things had filled her heart; but she had
feared the opposition she would meet with from all her home relations,
and so had stifled the Spirit of God, and tried to drown the voice of
conscience in a ceaseless round of so-called pleasure.

And now, to find that her own father had been feeling much as she had
done, but, not content with convictions of sin, had found the rest and
the peace she longed to possess. That night proved the turning-point
in the life of Clara Ross; and as she and her cousin sat together,
after Mr. Ross had returned home, the barrier of shyness between them
on sacred things fell, and Clara learned for the first time the way in
which Nora had been brought to decision in religious matters, and heard
all about the field-meeting, and the servant of God whose words had set
her free from Satan's chains.

Nature had spread her fairest, freshest mantle of tender green over
hill and dale, ere the cousins left the Bridge of Allan. The last
evening they spent together there, was one neither of them ever forgot,
one that rose often in memory's eye when seas rolled between the
friends.

Long they lingered, gazing out of the window on the fair scene before
them. The sun was beginning to set when first they took their seats
on the couch placed near the window. Light fleecy clouds, varied with
crimson and purple glory, were floating about on the horizon, as if
accompanying the sun to his resting-place; and after he had slowly sunk
behind the hills, they glowed even more brilliantly with his beams,
seeming now to be set in a background of molten gold, till the eye fell
beneath the exceeding beauty of the sight. But gradually the tints
paled, and at last changed into a soft gray, with only the faintest
blush of rosy hue, paling and paling till the shades of evening crept
over all, and a crescent moon cast its silvery beams on the scene.

Words exchanged that night were long remembered by the cousins; and as,
ere they parted, their voices rose together in prayer to their Father
in heaven, asking for grace to help in each time of need, in her heart
Nora thanked God that he led her to the quiet resting-place, and gave
to her the high honour of helping onward in the heavenly path a child
of his who was groping till then in the darkness, seeking light, but
finding none.

And Clara returned to her home, strong as of yore in body, to begin a
new life of usefulness, to prove a comfort to her father, and a light,
however feeble, to all who were in the home. From her heart now she
could thank God for the long weeks of trying illness through which she
had passed, when, withdrawn from the gay world's influence, she had had
time to be still and to hear his voice, and been enabled by his grace
to exchange the tinsel of a frivolous life for the true riches which
she had formerly despised, but which she now esteemed as far better
than gold and above rubies.

Nora wrote to her brother Ronald that Clara Ross had now begun the
warfare of life under the royal banner.



CHAPTER XIV.

A FAMILY GATHERING.

   "We shall meet in the Eden above,
      In that beautiful land of the bleat;
    All our trials and pains will be o'er
      When we enter that mansion of rest."

FOURTEEN years have passed since our first glimpse of Benvourd House
and its inmates. The month of September has come round again, when
once more we take a look there. The house is full of visitors—so full,
that Mr. Macleod says there must surely be three beds in every room;
but his wife denies that fact, though she confesses that every little
garret room is filled, and she is not sure that every one has a full
complement of pillows. But, in answer to that, all declare themselves
well satisfied; and the scanty accommodation only brings forth merry
remarks from the youngsters of the party.

Time has, indeed, brought changes in the circle since first we saw
them. There are silver threads not a few mingled with the dark hairs of
both Mr. and Mrs. Macleod; and even Charlie, who was only a toddling
two-year-old child when we first heard of him, is a fine manly-looking
stripling of more than sixteen years old, the very idol of the three
little girls and twin-brothers, who look up to him with great respect
as their big man-brother. Well may the Macleods look with thankfulness
at their six healthy, happy children; and if a tear dims their eyes as
they think of the loved daughter so early taken to glory, it is but for
a moment, for the child's short life had not been lived in vain, and
the Lord had made her death a means of softening some hard hearts, and
drawing the parents' affections more and more heavenward.

"The Lord hath been mindful of us, and he will bless us," was the
unspoken utterance of both the owners of Benvourd House, as they looked
round the assembled group.

Ronald, Eric, and Nora were there, though in altered circumstances
from the time we first saw them. Beside Ronald, now a partner in his
cousin's mercantile house in London, stood his fair wife, the Clara
Ross of earlier years. They have only been married a few months, and
this is their first trip since then to the Highlands. A quiet, happy
light shines in Clara's eyes; and of her it can truly be said, she is
a helpmeet for her husband. Hand in hand they are fighting beneath the
royal banner of the great King; hand in hand they are engaged in the
noble crusade which so many, thank God, are now waging against the
powers of darkness in the overcrowded London streets; and from amongst
many poor ones there, who through their instrumentality have been
rescued from destruction, there are those who call them blessed.

Husband and wife have strolled out together, leaving a group of merry
youngsters behind them. Ronald was the first to speak. "How well Nora
looks, does she not, even with the thoughts of to-morrow's ceremony and
the sad parting from so many whom she dearly loves. She wears a look of
calm heart-joy; and the more I see of him, the more I feel that Eustace
Ashley is the very husband for her, though one would fain have kept her
in our own country. Still, when we think of the greatness of the work
she is called upon to share as a missionary's wife, we dare not murmur;
and every day it is becoming plainer that China, with its teeming
millions, is a mighty field for mission work. Yes, as uncle said to me
this morning, 'We must give her up willingly to the Lord's work, for he
loveth a cheerful giver.'"

"And Eric, too, Clara, what a fine man he has turned out—first-rate at
business, I hear! Indeed, Ashley told me yesterday that he knows the
head of the firm in China where Eric is, and that he speaks confidently
of ere long taking him in as a junior partner. If it be so, we may
say his fortune, as regards this world, is made. And he is a true
Christian, quiet, but real. We little thought, when he first went to
Edinburgh to your father's house, Clara, that it was to be there he
would awake to a personal knowledge of Christ!"

"And was it so, Ronald?" said Clara, in a surprised tone.

"Yes, indeed; he has told me so himself. It was Pedro's firm belief
that he was a Christian boy, because he shrank from spending the Lord's
day in the way many of you then did, that first led him to see that he
took his religion only from the 'precepts of men,' but was a stranger
to Jesus, as his Saviour and Friend; so, as he says, it was Pedro who
all unconsciously led him to seek the Lord. But see—here comes Sir
James Dudley with uncle; let us join them."

It was well for Ronald that whilst thus occupied in talking to his
wife, he did not hear the conversation which Sir James Dudley was
carrying on with Mr. Macleod, for, indeed, praise of his friend Ronald
was the chief theme of it: the lad's admiration of the counsellor of
his boyhood was increasing with his years, and in his ardent way, he
loved to speak of the one to whom he felt he owed so much.

"Why, Mr. Macleod," he said, "I don't believe you half know what a
splendid fellow he is, nor how he is adored by all who serve with or
under him. You see, there is a friend of my mother's, whose only son is
a clerk in the house, and you should hear how he speaks of Macintosh.
Why, he says, but for him he might have been a dissipated man. He was
just standing on the verge of ruin, when Ronald came to his aid, took
him from the society of bad companions, and led him into the right
path."

Mr. Macleod's eyes glowed with pleasure as he listened. God had indeed
given to him and his wife a rich reward, in the way the three orphan
children whom they had brought up had turned out; and their praises
were sweet to his ear. And with growing pleasure, he saw the influence
for good that all three were exercising over his own children as they
advanced in years.

In the meantime, Nora had contrived to get alone with her aunt on this
the last day in her happy home, for the morrow was to be her bridal
day, and also that of a long farewell to Scotland's shores; for after
a short visit in England, she and her husband, accompanied by Eric,
were to set sail for China, the land in which her husband worked as a
missionary and her brother as a merchant. Her heart was full as she
thought of leaving so many dear ones, but yet new ties and a new love
filled her heart; and it was no small addition to her happiness that
she was going to help in the work of spreading the knowledge of Jesus
in a heathen land. Many loving words of advice and encouragement did
she receive that day from her mother-aunt,—words to be pondered over
and acted on when seas rolled between them.

Evening had come, and the youngsters, under the leadership of Sir
James Dudley and Pedro, started for a walk, when Ronald, Eric, and
Nora, detaching themselves from the rest, set out together. Almost
involuntarily, it seemed, they turned their steps in the direction of
the Wishing-Well. The sun's parting beams were just striking there
when they reached it, and a rich golden hue was glowing on all around,
lighting up the brilliantly coloured leaves of the various trees that
formed the background to the well. For a minute or two they paused
beside it, each heart recalling vividly the last time they had all
stood there together, on the eve of Ronald's departure for school in
England.

Eric was the first to break the silence. "Who remembers," he said, "the
day, many years ago, when we stood here, and each wished for something
beside this well? I wonder if our wishes have been fulfilled."

For a moment there was no reply.

Ronald remembered vividly how his wish had been to be a true Knight of
the Cross, and bear the royal banner boldly into the enemy's country;
and with that remembrance there arose the form of the mysterious
stranger who had showed him the real meaning of his somewhat fanciful
desire.

And Nora, too, was recalling the wish of her heart, that she might
obtain what her mother desired for her, that she might be above rubies.

Whilst she and Ronald hesitated, Eric spoke again—"My wish has, I
believe, been granted, though not in the way I expected. I have got
riches, great riches—even the untold wealth of the saving knowledge of
Christ Jesus, which is indeed 'better than gold.'"

"Yes," said Ronald, "Eric is right; I do believe that the Lord has
indeed given unto us exceeding abundantly above what we desired. He
has given to me the desire of my heart—to be a banner-bearer in his
glorious army, and to help in some small degree the weak and oppressed
ones. And you also, Nora, can say that your wish has been fulfilled. Is
it not so?"

And Nora bowed her head in grateful acknowledgment of the fact. She
knew in her inmost heart that she too had long ago obtained that which
is above rubies.



CHAPTER XV.

THE BRIDAL DAY.

            "He traineth us,
   That we may shine for Him in this dark world,
   And bear His standard dauntlessly unfurled;
   That we may show
   His praise by lives that mirror back His love—
   His witnesses on earth, as He is ours above."

THE marriage day had come at last. The quiet ceremony was to take
place in the drawing-room of Benvourd House. And Clara was putting the
finishing touches to her sister-in-law's bridal dress, and arranging
the simple white wreath, with just a small spray of orange-blossom in
it, on her head, when a thought struck her.

"Why, Nora," she said, "what has become of the costly diadem of gold
and rubies I used to envy you the possession of when we were girls? I
don't believe you have ever once worn it."

Nora smiled. "No, Clara, I never have; and now it is mine no longer."

"Why not, dear? Have you given it away? Of course, you were entitled to
do so, for it was your own. To whom have you given it?"

At that question, the bride's eyes sparkled with a glad light, and she
quietly answered, "To the Lord, Clara dear; right into his treasury it
went, some three or four months ago. Uncle and aunt and Ronald also
knew and approved; indeed, they felt as if I could have done nothing
else. I have given myself, you know, Clara, to the Lord for his service
and could I withhold the most precious earthly possession I had? No,
dear; I was only too glad I had it to give; and Eustace felt the same.
How could I hear of the spiritual destitution of the millions of souls
in China without desiring to aid them, not only by my life, but also by
my means? And so, when Ronald found a trustworthy jeweller, willing to
give a full price for the diadem, I sold it, and the money has gone ere
this to aid the funds of the Chinese mission."

Clara's eyes filled. "O Nora, I am glad it is so! And Eustace will feel
as I do, if he be not blind, that it needs no diadem of gold and rubies
to beautify the brow of his bride to-day. But a truce to more talking
now. I believe Ronald is waiting impatiently to take you down."

One moment the cousins knelt together in silent prayer, then quietly
descended to the drawing-room.

The autumn sun was still brightly shining, when the carriage drove up,
after the luncheon was over, to bear off the bride and bridegroom.

There was a mixed feeling of joy and sorrow in the hearts of all,
for Nora Ashley was bidding, it might be, a long adieu to the home
of her childhood, every spot of which was endeared to her by loving
associations. Only that morning she had gone alone to strew some of her
bridal flowers on the graves of her mother and of her little cousin
Minnie, well knowing that she might never again revisit the spot.
And now, even as with tear-dimmed eyes she drove once again through
the lovely pass, gorgeous in its autumn dress, she cast around her a
look which seemed as if it would stereotype the scene for ever on her
memory's eye, to arise clearly in distant lands.

As she passed the hut where the old nurse had lived and died, she
pointed it out to her husband; and as she did so, she seemed once more
to feel the kind touch of the loving hand as it one day had pushed
back her golden brown hair, and to hear the voice which had said, "I'm
wonderin', my lambie, what kind o' a crown will sit on that bonnie
brow; whether it will be the crown o' a vain world's folly, or the
everlastin' one that your mother prayed so earnestly might rest there?"

And Nora knew now which it was; and even in the midst of her bridal
happiness, she could look forward with joy to the day when she would
take the golden crown put on her head by the Saviour's own hand, and
casting it at his feet, give to him all the glory for evermore.

Meantime, the party assembled at the door of Benvourd House to see
the young couple drive off, turned slowly indoors; only Mr. and Mrs.
Macleod and Ronald lingered a few minutes, to catch sight of the
carriage as it wound down the steep road below the pass.

"God's blessing go with them both," said Mr. Macleod. "Long shall we
miss our Nora, Ronald; beautifully has she fulfilled her home duties.
And now she goes forth to a foreign land to work for the Lord in a
distant part of his vineyard. As I told Eustace Ashley, ere parting, he
was a happy man to have secured her for a wife; for truly 'the heart of
her husband may safely trust in her. Her price is above rubies.'"

"Yes," said Ronald, "it is even so. Our mother's dying prayer has been
truly answered as regards Nora; she has obtained that wisdom of which
it is written, 'The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall
it be valued with pure gold,' for 'the price of it is above rubies.' It
can be said of her with truth that 'she stretcheth out her hand to the
poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy,' and also that
'in her tongue is the law of kindness.'"

"I believe she will exert an influence for good wherever she goes, and
prove to be well fitted for the arduous duties of a missionary's wife.
And well may we ask God to bless and keep both her and her husband, as
they go forth to lift high in heathen lands the Royal Banner of the
King of kings; and may both be as crowns of glory in the hand of the
Lord, and as royal diadems on the head of our God!"



                            THE END.



